  • A1
Revised 1/23
Team  Manual Cover 2023.indd   1Team  Manual Cover 2023.indd   1 2/16/23   10:42 AM2/16/23   10:42 AM

5% DISCOUNT
USE CODE: APARULES 
*Some restrictions may apply.1.866.THE DAWGWWW.POOLDAWG.COMWWW.POOLDAWG.COM
OFFICIAL ONLINE  
RETAIL STORE  
OF THE APAYOUR  
TEAM  YOUR  
TEAM   
FOR ALL OF  
YOUR POOL  
EQUIPMENT NEEDS!
ORDER YOUR
FREE 
CATALOG TODAY!  APA OFFICIAL 
SPONSORS
Official Cues and Cases  
of the APAOfficial Ball of the APA
and the APA Championships
Official Online Billiards Retailer of APA
Official Sponsor of the APA Championships
Official Pool Table of the APA 
and the APA Championships
Team  Manual Cover 2023.indd   2Team  Manual Cover 2023.indd   2 2/16/23   10:42 AM2/16/23   10:42 AM

  • 1January  SPRING SESSION BEGINS
 8-Ball Classic and 9-Ball Shootout Season 1
 Qualifying Window Opens  
 (Qualifiers Advance to Fall Regionals)
February/  8-Ball Classic and 9-Ball Shootout Spring Regionals  
March  
April/May  Poolplayer Championships  
 Westgate Las Vegas   
June/July  SUMMER SESSION BEGINS
 U.S. Amateur Championship Entry Window Closes
 8-Ball Classic and 9-Ball Shootout Season 1  
 Qualifying Window Closes  
 ( Qualifiers Advance to Fall Regionals)
 8-Ball Classic and 9-Ball Shootout Season 2  
 Qualifying Window Opens  
 (Qualifiers Advance to Spring Regionals)
 Junior Championships
August  World Pool Championships  
 Westgate Las Vegas  
September  FALL SESSION BEGINS
 U.S. Amateur Preliminary Rounds
October/  8-Ball Classic and 9-Ball Shootout Fall Regionals
 U.S. Amateur Championship
 U.S. Amateur Championship Entry Window Opens
 8-Ball Classic and 9-Ball Shootout Season 2  
 Qualifying Window Closes  
 (Qualifiers Advance to Spring Regionals)
December  Renew Your Membership!CALENDAR
The contents of this Team Manual are the exclusive property of the American Poolplayers 
Association, Inc. © American Poolplayers Association, Inc. 1982, 1992, 1994, 1996, 1998, 2000, 
2002, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, 2012, 2014, 2016, 2018, 2020, 2023. All Rights Reserved.November

  • 2


  • 3
INTRODUCTION
This is the APA Official Team Manual. It contains the rules, procedures 
and guidelines you will need to know to maximize your enjoyment 
during League play. The entire team should become thoroughly 
familiar with the contents of this manual, as knowing the rules will 
ensure that you, and your teammates, fully enjoy League play. 
NOTE:  By participating in the League, every member agrees to abide 
by the rules set forth in this manual.
Be sure to have this manual available at every League match. If you 
lose or misplace it, contact your Local League Management. An online 
version of this manual is always available at poolplayers.com and on 
the Member Services App.
APA developed its own handicap system,  The Equalizer®, which makes 
it possible for players of all abilities to compete on a nearly even level.
League play allows you to compete year-round. Your team will enjoy 
professional League Management, receive great membership benefits 
and have the opportunity to participate in the largest and most 
rewarding Tournaments offered.
Learn the rules and get lots of practice. Good luck and good shooting 
to you and your teammates.
Sincerely,
 
Terry Bell, Founder and Chairman of the Board
American Poolplayers Association

  • 4


  • 5FOREWORD
The American Poolplayers Association (APA) was founded by 
Terry Bell and Larry Hubbart, who at the time were touring 
professionals and who have since been inducted into the Billiard 
Congress of America Hall of Fame. Their goal was to organize 
the sport of pool on the amateur level and to encourage the 
growth of the game. Since its inception in 1979, APA has become 
recognized as The Governing Body of Amateur Pool .
The American Poolplayers Association spans the globe.  It 
includes the Canadian Poolplayers Association (CPA), the 
Japanese Poolplayers Association (JPA), and the APA of 
Singapore. Most importantly, thanks to you, the League is over a 
quarter million members strong and growing. 
The rules, procedures and guidelines in this manual apply to all 
League and Tournament play.
It is impossible to cover every situation with written rules. Relax, 
enjoy yourself, and play within the Spirit of the Rules. Common 
sense must prevail.  Teams that try to gain an advantage by 
creating their own interpretations are subject to sportsmanship 
violations. Win at the table and not from the chair is a principle 
that promotes harmony,  friendship and good times. That’s what 
this League is all about.

  • 6ETIQUETTE
Many billiards enthusiasts are unfamiliar with the unwritten rules of 
pool etiquette. Breaking one of these rules can result in arguments 
and hard feelings between players and teams. Please show good 
sportsmanship and common courtesy to both your opponents and the 
Host Location by observing these basic etiquette guidelines:
• Treat your opponent as you would like to be treated.
• Wish your opponent good luck before the match begins.
• Stay away from the table and out of your opponent’s line of 
sight when they are shooting.
• Do not engage your opponent in conversation while  
they are shooting.
• Call your own fouls – do not wait for a foul to be called on you, 
or to be asked if you committed a foul. Players with integrity 
call their own fouls and tell their opponent when they have 
ball-in-hand, or hand their opponent the cue ball.
• Pay attention to your match.
• Be ready to shoot when it is your turn.
• Do not break down your cue until your match is over.
• If you are expected to play the next match, have your cue and 
enough money for the table (if needed) ready.
• Begin your match as soon as the previous match is over.
• Observe all time guidelines.
• Show respect to your opponent, win or lose. 

Etiqu EttE  • 7Cheering for your teammate is part of the fun, but don’t root against 
your opponent. Observing these guidelines and displaying good 
sportsmanship helps ensure a fun and competitive evening of  
League play.
Without our Host Locations, there would be no APA Leagues.  Host 
Locations have the right to refuse service to anyone, at any time. 
APA cannot require a Host Location to host a team or to let specific 
individuals in the door.  Remember you are the Host Location’s guest. 
Please follow these basic guidelines:
• Be courteous and polite to the staff.
• Always respect the equipment – table, balls, cues, etc.
• Be knowledgeable of, and adhere to, House Rules.
• Take care not to dig the tip of your cue when breaking.
• Do not slam balls or bang cues on the floor or table.
• Do not set drinks on the pool tables.
• Never smoke at the table.
• Do not sit on the rails.
• Be aware of your surroundings. If someone is in the way of a 
shot, wait for them to move or politely ask them to move.
• Unless Host Location policy allows it, never bring in outside 
food or beverages.

Etiqu EttE  • 8TIME GUIDELINES
The following time guidelines have been established as a result of 
years of research and analysis.  They take into consideration all skill 
levels. The time guidelines listed below are easily achievable when 
teams and players do their best to follow them.
8-Ball Team Matches
• A team match should take no more than 4 hours.
• Individual matches should average 8 to 10 minutes per rack.
9-Ball Team Matches
• A team match should take no more than 3.5 hours.
• The average individual match should take between 30  
to 40 minutes.
Masters Team Matches
• A team match should take no more than 3 hours.
• The average individual match should take between 45  
to 60 minutes.
Doubles Team Matches
• A team match should take no more than 2 hours.
• Individual matches should average 8 to 10 minutes per rack in 
8-Ball or 30 to 40 minutes in 9-Ball.
• A doubles match should average 45 minutes.
NOTE: Exceeding the time guidelines is not a foul; however, it can 
result in a sportsmanship violation.QUICK REFERENCE GUIDE
Average Shot ......................  20 Seconds
Special Shooting Situation  ..........  45 Seconds
Time-outs  ........................... 1 Minute
New Player Selection ................. 1 Minute
Team Match Forfeit  ................. 15 Minutes 
 (past appointed start time)
8-Ball Team Match  ................... 4 Hours
9-Ball Team Match  ..................  3.5 Hours
Doubles Matches (8-Ball & 9-Ball)  ..... 2 Hours
Masters Team Match  ................. 3 Hours
Ladies Team Match  .................  2.5 Hours

tAblE of Cont Ents • 9TABLE OF CONTENTS  
Calendar  ............................................  1
Introduction  ........................................  3
Foreword  ...........................................  5
Etiquette  ...........................................  6
Time Guidelines  .....................................  8
League Structure  ...................................  12
The League Operator  ................................ 12
League Organization  ................................. 12
Membership  ........................................ 16
Fees  ................................................ 16
Calendar  ............................................ 17
Scheduling  .......................................... 18
Scoring .............................................. 18
Trophies And Awards  ................................ 18
Local Bylaws  ......................................... 19
General Rules  .......................................  20
No Gambling  ........................................ 20
Age Requirements  ................................... 20
Verification Of Identity ................................ 20
Gender Eligibility  ..................................... 21
Every Player Must Be A Current Member  ............... 21
New Players  ......................................... 21
Proof Of Membership  ................................ 22
Membership Renewals  ................................ 22
Rosters  ............................................. 23
You May Appear On Only One Team  
Roster Within A Division  .............................. 23
Team Match Play  ..................................... 24
Who Plays First & Order Of Play . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Who Pays For The Games . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Byes  ................................................ 24
Forfeits  ............................................. 25
Concerning Teams That Drop Out  ..................... 27
Splitting Matches  .................................... 27
Coaching  ........................................... 28
Host Locations  ....................................... 30
Make Sure You Keep Score Properly  ................... 30
Defensive Shots  ...................................... 31

tAblE of Cont Ents • 10Handicap System  ..................................... 32
Local Lowest Attainable ............................... 32
Championship Lowest Attainable  ...................... 33
Team Skill Level Limit  ................................. 33
Limited Number Of Senior Skill Level  
Players (8-Ball and 9-Ball) .............................. 34
Session Playoffs  ...................................... 35
Amateur Players Only ................................. 38
Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Players Receiving Incentives  .......................... 39
Rules Are Subject To Change  ......................... 39
Protests And Disputes  ................................ 40
Appeals  ............................................. 41
Right To Refuse Service  ............................... 41
APA Is The Highest Authority .......................... 41
Game Rules  ........................................  43
General Description  .................................. 43
Lagging  ............................................. 44
Racking  ............................................. 44
Breaking  ............................................ 45
After The Break  ...................................... 46
Shooting The Wrong Balls .............................  47
Combination Shots  ................................... 48
Pocketed Balls  ....................................... 48
Balls On The Floor .................................... 49
Accidentally Moved Balls .............................. 49
Close Hits  ........................................... 50
One Foot On The Floor  ............................... 50
Marking The Table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Stalemates  ........................................... 51
Frozen Balls ..........................................  51
Fouls  ................................................ 53
How To Win A Game .................................. 55
The Equalizer® Handicap System  ......................  57
How Handicaps Are Determined ....................... 57
How To Get Started  .................................. 58
Games Must Win Charts  .............................. 58
How To Use Scoresheets And Score Matches  ...........  60
How To Score 8-Ball  .................................. 62
How To Score 9-Ball  .................................. 64

tAblE of Cont Ents • 11How To Score Masters  ................................ 67
Conduct During League Play  .........................  68
Physical Contact  ..................................... 68
Verbal Abuse  ........................................ 69
Follow-Up Actions  .................................... 70
Tournament Information And Rules  ...................  72
General Tournament Information  ...................... 72
Championship Tournaments  .......................... 72
World Pool Championships  ........................... 76
Glossary  ...........................................  82
Table Diagram  ......................................  86
Index  ..............................................  87
Read Notable Changes to 
This Official Team ManualCli CK HERE!

tAblE of Cont Ents • 12LEAGUE STRUCTURE
SECTION 1
THE LEAGUE OPERATOR
APA operates through a network of independent franchise owners 
called League Operators (LOs). League Operators have full authority 
to make rulings concerning all aspects of the League in their local 
area. APA stays in close contact with its League Operators, keeps 
them up-to-date with the latest developments on rules, formats and 
all other changes, and makes rulings on issues presented to it by 
League Operators. Your League Operator is a trained professional. 
Therefore, you can have confidence that the schedules, standings, skill 
level assignments, special events and all other aspects of the League’s 
operation will be handled timely and accurately. Only an APA-
authorized League Operator may administer an APA League. Your 
League Operator may hire additional assistants and/or representatives 
to improve service in their League. Your League Operator, along 
with their assistants and representatives, form the Local League 
Management. Your League Operator is the highest authority on all 
decisions made by Local League Management.  
LEAGUE ORGANIZATION
The Formats - Various formats have been established for League 
play. If you are interested in a format not currently offered in your area, 
contact your Local League Management. Every effort will be made 
to get it started. Check with your Local League Management for the 
formats offered in your area. The formats offered are:
• Open Format - A team match which consists of five individual 
handicapped matches.
• Ladies & 3-Person - A team match which consists of three 
individual handicapped matches.
• Doubles - A team match which consists of two individual 
handicapped matches and one alternating-shot doubles 
handicapped match.
• Masters - A team match which consists of three individual matches 
following U.S. Amateur Championship rules. Each individual match 

lEA guE stRuCtuRE • 13will be a race-to-7, playing up to eight games of 9-Ball and five 
games of 8-Ball. Players earn one point for each game won.
• Juniors -  Check your Local Bylaws.
The Team - A team consists of a group of players, the number of which 
is determined by the format the team is playing. All team members 
bear the responsibility of ensuring that their teammates are members 
of legal age, who are playing at skill levels that reflect their true ability. 
Each team will have a Team Captain. The number of players on a team 
roster in each format is as follows:
• Open Divisions (8-Ball & 9-Ball) - Minimum of five players, 
maximum of eight.
• Ladies & 3-Person Divisions -  Minimum of three players, 
maximum of five.
• Doubles Divisions -  Minimum of two players, maximum of three.  
• Masters Divisions -  Minimum of three players, maximum of four.
• Juniors Divisions -  Check your Local Bylaws.
The Team Captain - The Team Captain is the person listed first 
on the team roster and is responsible for managing the team. The 
Team Captain should have a valid phone number and email address 
on file, as the Team Captain is the team’s point of contact for all 
communication from the Local League Management. A team may 
elect a new Team Captain through a simple majority vote at any time. 
Local League Management must be notified immediately when a new 
Team Captain is elected. Team Captains are expected to:
• Share League information and announcements with the members 
of their team.
• Post information at their Host Location.
• Collect membership dues and weekly fees and forward them to 
Local League Management in a timely manner.
• Have their team at the appropriate location on time.
• Ensure that all rules concerning etiquette, sportsmanship and 
eligibility are observed.
• Make sure proper scorekeeping procedures are followed.

lEA guE stRuCtuRE • 14The Division - A division consists of a number of teams (ideally from 
6 to 16) competing with each other in a set schedule and geographic 
area. Local League Management, at its discretion, will do its best to 
minimize the distance teams within a division must travel.
NOTE: In some instances, a division may start with only four teams, 
although a six-team division is the smallest division recommended.
The Host Location - Most Host Locations are businesses that have 
chosen to provide a place for teams to participate in League play. The 
best way to show appreciation for our hosts is to enjoy their services 
and be model customers as, without them, there would be no League.
APA Members must respect the Host Location and 
their property, and follow their policies and guidelines 
for acceptable behavior, commonly known as House 
Rules. For example, while League rules may allow 
massé and jump shots, if House Rules prohibit such 
shots, the House Rules must prevail.
APA cannot and does not dictate their Host Locations’ business 
practices. Host Locations have the right to refuse service to anyone 
at any time, even in the middle of a session.  Neither APA, nor Local 
League Management, can require Host Locations to host teams or 
let specific individuals in the door for the purpose of participating in 
League play. 
Each Host Location may accommodate up to two teams per table 
during a period of play. Local League Management will set the 
schedule so that there are never more League matches in a location 
than there are available tables.
The Division Representative - The Division Representative (DR) is 
generally appointed by the League Operator. The DR is a person of 
integrity who is consistently active in the League, is a member in good 
standing and enjoys being more involved. The DR is knowledgeable 
about League affairs and may be consulted on matters related to the 
League. Consulted  is the key word, because the DR does not have the 
authority to make rulings. However, it would be a logical choice to call 
your DR if you have a question on a rule, as they may be able  
to help.  
Please consult your Local League Management for the duties assigned Hous E 
RulEs 
Must 
PREVA il

lEA guE stRuCtuRE • 15to your DR, as duties may vary from area to area. Some of the most 
common duties may include:
• Communicating announcements and distributing other League 
information and materials to Team Captains and the Host Locations 
in their division(s).
• Ensuring player feedback gets to the Local League Management.
• Assisting Local League Management with Tournaments and other 
special events.
• Acting as a member of the Board of Governors.
• Assisting in the recruitment of new players, teams and  
Host Locations.
The Board of Governors - The purpose of the Board of Governors 
(BOG) and its members is to assist the League Operator. A BOG 
generally consists of a number of Division Representatives, although 
not all BOG members are required to be DRs. Your Local League's 
BOG may:
• Provide feedback to the League Operator on Local Bylaws  
and procedures.
• Provide input on how protests and disputes between members 
should be resolved.
• Assist the League Operator to resolve sportsmanship violations.
If deemed necessary, the BOG may recommend sanctions including 
but not limited to:
• Loss of one or more points.
• Loss of player or team eligibility and/or qualification.
• Repayments.
• Suspension or probation, and the appropriate time frame for each.
The League Operator represents a higher authority than the BOG, 
but APA asks League Operators to uphold the findings of the BOG 
unless they are in violation of League rules or policies, or blatantly 
inconsistent with the facts presented to the BOG. The BOG may 
not conduct meetings without being asked to do so by the League 
Operator. It is essential to understand that they are not intended or 
authorized to monitor, criticize or supervise the League Operator. 
BOG Members who cannot accept their role as described may be 

lEA guE stRuCtuRE • 16removed from the Board. BOGs are important tools to ensure that 
disputes get resolved fairly. Please respect your BOG's rulings at  
all times.
The Handicap Advisory Committee - The League Operator may find 
it useful to establish a Handicap Advisory Committee (HAC) to assist 
with handicap observations and rulings concerning sandbagging 
violations. The HAC, if one exists, will normally consist of a number of 
highly skilled members who are familiar with APA League play. HAC 
members may be known to the membership or their identities may be 
kept confidential. The League Operator represents a higher authority 
than the HAC.  
MEMBERSHIP
You may sign up or renew your membership online at poolplayers.
com, through the Member Services App, or by giving your 
membership dues to your Local League Management with a 
completed and signed membership application.  Your Local League 
Management will forward your membership dues to APA.  
IMPORTANT:  It is your responsibility to provide APA and the 
Local League Management with up-to-date and complete profile 
information. If renewing your membership, correct any errors and/or 
update your contact information on the renewal notice or online. 
Transferability - Your membership is accepted wherever an APA 
sanctioned League exists. There is no transfer fee if you decide to 
change Leagues, or play in more than one League. If you move from 
one League area to another, simply notify Local League Management 
and let them know that you have participated in another area. The 
Local League Management in your new area will obtain your records. 
If there are no APA sanctioned Leagues in your new area, call APA; 
every effort will be made to get one started. When you transfer to 
a new area, you must participate at your previously established skill 
level. Memberships are not refundable and not transferable from one 
person to another.  
FEES
Annual Membership Dues - Your membership must be current 
for you to be eligible to participate in any APA event. Some events 

lEA guE stRuCtuRE • 17take place over a period of many months and membership must be 
maintained in order to remain eligible. Annual membership dues are 
currently $30 plus applicable taxes and expire December 31. The 
amount of the annual membership dues may be changed by APA at its 
discretion.
Members who join after August 15 pay full annual membership dues; 
however, their annual dues will be prorated to $15 the following 
year provided they renew on or before March 1. After March 1, all 
membership dues will be $30.
NOTE 1: Members who join in the month of December are not 
required to renew the following January.  Their membership will cover 
the remainder of the year in which they joined, and the entire next year.  
NOTE 2: If your Spring Session starts in December, your membership 
for the upcoming year will be due the first time you play a Spring 
Session match or by week four of the Spring Session, whichever occurs 
first.
NOTE 3:  Annual membership dues are non-refundable.
Juniors -  Annual membership dues are $10. The prorated renewal 
amount, if applicable, is $5.
Weekly Fee - Teams pay a weekly fee to participate in League activity. 
The amount charged in your area is established by your League 
Operator. The entire weekly fee is due regardless of how many players 
are on the roster or how many players played during the match.
Cash, Check or Electronic Payment - APA urges teams to make 
all League payments by check, money order or electronic payment 
methods (where available). Local League Management cannot assume 
responsibility for cash payments that are not received.
CALENDAR
There are three sessions during the League year: Summer, Fall and 
Spring. World Qualifiers are held at the end of the Spring Session. 
Each League year culminates with the World Pool Championships, 
typically held in August.  

lEA guE stRuCtuRE • 18SCHEDULING
Session schedules will vary depending upon the number of teams 
playing in a division and the length of the session. Check the division 
schedule often in the first few weeks of a session, as it is likely to change.  
SCORING
Team matches consist of a series of individual head-to-head matches 
between members of each team. In each individual match, one team 
member plays an opponent designated by the other team. The team 
points earned each week are totaled over the course of a session. 
The teams with the most points at the end of the session are entitled 
to compete in Playoffs, discussed later in this manual. The number of 
points a team can earn in a week of League play are:
• Open 8-Ball Divisions - Each individual match is worth up to three 
points. A team can win a maximum of 15 points.
• Open 9-Ball Divisions - Each individual match is worth up to 20 
points. A team can win a maximum of 100 points.
• Ladies Divisions - Each individual match is worth up to three 
points. A team can win a maximum of nine points.
• 3-Person Divisions (8-Ball) -  Each individual match is worth up to 
three points. A team can win a maximum of nine points.
• 3-Person Divisions (9-Ball) - Each individual match is worth up to 
20 points. A team can win a maximum of 60 points.
• Doubles Divisions (8-Ball) - Each individual match is worth up 
to three points and the doubles match is worth up to six points. A 
team can win a maximum of 12 points.
• Doubles Divisions (9-Ball) - Each individual match is worth up to 
20 points and the doubles match is worth up to 40 points. A team 
can win a maximum of 80 points.
• Masters Divisions - Each individual match is worth up to seven 
points. A team can win a maximum of 21 points.
• Junior Divisions - Check your Local Bylaws.  
TROPHIES AND AWARDS
Each session, the Division Championship team members may receive 
a trophy, plaque or other appropriate award. Please refer to your Local 
Bylaws for the awards presented in your area.

lEA guE stRuCtuRE • 19In some areas, a team trophy or plaque may be awarded and kept on  
display at the Host Location. Your League may also recognize teams, or  
individual players, with additional annual or seasonal awards, such  
as Most Valuable Player (MVP), sportsmanship and other 
accomplishments.
LOCAL BYLAWS
There are some subjects that are covered by Local Bylaws, a document 
put together by your League Operator with the approval of APA. 
Local Bylaws may differ from portions of this manual. The rules and 
guidelines outlined in each League's Local Bylaws apply only in that 
League area. Topics that may be addressed in your League’s Local 
Bylaws can include, but are not limited to:
• Procedures for dropping off and picking up scoresheets.
• Penalties for late scoresheets and/or fees.
• Procedures for registering teams for the next session.
• Specific penalties for disruptive behavior.
• Information concerning etiquette and sportsmanship.
• Policies regarding the use of electronic devices during local League 
play.
• Procedures to be followed by the Board of Governors.
• Descriptions of awards that will be given out during the League 
Year, including the amount of Travel Assistance awarded to teams 
qualifying for the World Pool Championships.
• Inclement weather policy.
• Office Hours.
• Requirements for requesting and scheduling pre-play or make-up 
matches.
Make sure you are familiar with the Local Bylaws for your area.
NOTE: Local Bylaws may not create ball-in-hand fouls. The Game 
Rules section of this manual contains the exclusive and complete list of 
ball-in-hand fouls.  
loCAl  bYlAWs  MAY not  CREAtE 
bAll -in-HAnD fouls

lEA guE stRuCtuRE • 20GENERAL RULES
S EC T ION 2  
General Rules govern many of the situations that occur during 
regular weekly play. This section does not address Game Rules, 
which are covered elsewhere in this manual. General Rules include 
forfeits, protest and dispute procedures, grace periods, membership 
requirements, how matches are started, who pays for the tables, 
sportsmanship issues and many more topics.
All the rules in this section are the Official APA Rules. They are the 
result of years of accumulated experience and input from players, 
Boards and League Operators. Fairness to players of all abilities is 
the prime consideration for these rules and procedures. With APA 
approval, some variances may be included in Local Bylaws. These are 
the General Rules:  
1. NO GAMBLING
Gambling on pool is prohibited at all APA functions. This includes, but 
is not limited to, known wagers between players, side bets, side pots, 
selling teams, auctions and Calcuttas. 
2. AGE REQUIREMENTS
Regular League play is open to members at least 18 years of age. Some 
League areas may have higher minimum age requirements due to 
restrictions imposed by state, province, region, prefecture, local laws or 
by Host Locations. Check your Local Bylaws for the age requirements in 
your area. Teams with underage players may face penalties.  
Junior Leagues, where available, are for members under the age of 18.  
There are no minimum age restrictions placed on Junior Leagues by 
APA; however, local laws or customs take precedence.    
3. VERIFICATION OF IDENTITY
Your opponent has the right to request proof of identity from you 
and your teammates. If requested, you must provide a State/Province 
issued picture ID, Military ID or passport to establish that you are the 
person listed on your team's roster. If the identification produced 

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 21is not adequate, play the match, file a protest and give your Local 
League Management time to settle the matter. Whenever a person 
plays an individual match purporting to be someone they are not, 
each member of the team or teams involved in the falsification will be 
suspended and/or disqualified.
4. GENDER ELIGIBILITY
Participation in some divisions, and events, is limited to members 
of certain genders. If the eligibility of a participant in one of these 
divisions, or events, is questioned, the gender listed on the State/
Province issued picture ID, Military ID or passport will be used to 
determine eligibility.  
5. EVERY PLAYER MUST BE A CURRENT MEMBER 
A team that allows a player to play without a current membership will 
receive zero points for the week(s) in which the individual plays. Their 
opponent will receive the points they won during the team match, plus 
all points available in any individual match involving an unpaid player. 
It is the Team Captain’s responsibility to make sure all team members 
have paid their renewal or submitted a completed membership 
application along with the required fees the first time they play. If a 
player has not played by the fourth week, their fees must be paid at 
that time, or they will be dropped from your team’s roster.  
6. NEW PLAYERS
New players must become members before playing their first match, 
either by becoming a member online at poolplayers.com or the 
Member Services App, or by submitting their membership fees and 
a completed and signed membership application with their team's 
scoresheet. Teams that allow an unpaid player to participate in a team 
match will be held accountable for the unpaid membership fee the 
following week.
Generally, new players will start at a skill level 3 (SL3).
NOTE 1:  Local League Management is authorized to assign a new 
player a higher starting skill level if they believe the higher skill level 
more accurately reflects the player's true pool playing ability.

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 22NOTE 2: Players with an established skill level in the 8-Ball format 
will start play in 9-Ball with their 8-Ball skill level; players with an 
established skill level in the 9-Ball format will start play in 8-Ball with 
their 9-Ball skill level, unless they are a SL1, SL8 or SL9 in 9-Ball. A SL1 in 
9-Ball will begin as a SL2 in 8-Ball; a SL8 or SL9 in 9-Ball will begin as a 
SL7 in 8-Ball.
The skill level of new players may not immediately reflect their true 
ability since their ability is not yet known. It is not unusual for a new 
player's skill level to fluctuate during the first few weeks. A player’s 
skill level is not considered established until they have 10 actual match 
scores in that format on their record.  Penalties may be assessed at the 
discretion of Local League Management for starting a player of known 
ability as a new player.  
7. PROOF OF MEMBERSHIP
You must demonstrate that you are a current member to receive APA 
awards and member discounts. You can download a copy of your 
membership card at poolplayers.com or access your card digitally 
using the Member Services App on your mobile device.
8. MEMBERSHIP RENEWALS
Players may renew their membership for the upcoming calendar year 
online at poolplayers.com beginning October 1. When renewing, 
please be sure to update your contact information. Your renewal fee 
must be paid the first time you play a match in the new calendar year.
EXCEPTION:  If your Fall Session ends after the first of the year, 
membership fees are not due until the first time you play a match in 
the Spring Session. If your Spring Session starts in December, your 
membership for the upcoming year will be due the first time you play a 
Spring Session match or by week four of the Spring Session, whichever 
occurs first.
Renewal notices may be circulated at the end of the Fall Session, 
during Team Captains’ Meetings in the Spring Session and/or during 
the first week of Spring Session play. Any member who has not 
renewed by the end of the fourth week of play will be dropped from 
all team rosters. If a team has a player on its roster that is unavailable to 
renew prior to the fourth week, the team is advised to renew for them.  

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 239. ROSTERS
Players may be added to your roster at any time during the first four 
weeks of each session. The opposing team should be notified of 
the roster change before the team match begins. To add a player, 
simply change them on the Scorekeeper App, or write the word "add" 
and the player’s name next to the roster on your copy of the weekly 
scoresheet. To drop a player, draw a line through their name on your 
scoresheet and write “drop” next to it.
If a new team member participated in another APA League area or is 
a former member, they must play at their established skill level. Before 
allowing your new teammate to play, your Team Captain must contact 
Local League Management to obtain the player’s established skill 
level. If they play at a lower skill level, Local League Management has 
the discretion to forfeit the match. If it is discovered that a transferring 
or returning player played below their established skill level during 
a Championship Tournament, the player's team may be subject to 
disqualification. Players may be dropped at any time during the 
session, and should be dropped if they become unreliable or cause 
problems in the League.
Adding players to your roster after week four requires prior approval 
from the Local League Management. A strict prohibition against 
allowing teams to add players after the fourth week of a session could 
force some teams to drop out of the League, leading to forfeits and 
reducing the opportunity for their opponents to play.  However, Local 
League Management is not required to allow a team to add a player 
after the fourth week.  
All roster changes for qualified teams must be made prior to the team 
submitting their week four scoresheets. Altering the roster of a 
qualified team after week four of the Spring Session will result in 
the team losing its qualification.
NOTE:  No player may play without a handicap after the seventh week 
of any session, without approval from Local League Management.  
10. YOU MAY APPEAR ON ONLY ONE TEAM 
ROSTER WITHIN A DIVISION
You may only be on one team per division.  Once you have played a 
match, you may not change teams within a division during a session, 
unless approved by Local League Management, and then only once 
during the first four weeks.  

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 2411. TEAM MATCH PLAY
The format determines the number of individual matches played 
during a team match. You may only play once in a team match, unless 
otherwise set out in your Local Bylaws.
12. WHO PLAYS FIRST & ORDER OF PLAY
Team Captains flip a coin to decide which team will declare the first 
player. The winner of the toss has the choice of declaring first or having 
the opposing Team Captain declare first. Whichever team declares 
first in the first match, declares second in the second match, first again 
in the third match, and so on.
Once both teams have declared a player, the players cannot be 
changed unless the team's choice of player will violate the Team Skill 
Level Limit rule or the Limited Senior Skill Level rule.  While teams are 
not required to notify their opponent that they are about to break the 
Team Skill Level Limit rule or the Limited Senior Skill Level rule, it is 
considered good sportsmanship to notify the opponent, and to give 
them an opportunity to declare a different player.
13. WHO PAYS FOR THE GAMES
Teams will pay equally for table use during a match. Requiring the 
losing team to pay the table fees is not permitted.  Local League 
Management cannot create exceptions to this rule.  
a. On coin-operated tables - Both teams should place a sufficient 
number of quarters near the coin mechanism. If there are any 
quarters left when the match is over, they should be equally 
divided between the two teams.
b. On timed tables - The cost of table time should be paid equally by 
both teams.  
14. BYES
Some division schedules may start with a bye or a bye may appear in 
a division as the result of a team dropping out. Byes do not count as 
matches played. Concerning scheduling and byes:
a. If a division schedule includes a bye, Local League Management 
will make every effort to fill the bye. If the bye is filled, teams may 
be required to schedule make-up matches at the discretion of 
Local League Management.

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 25b. If a team drops out of a division creating a bye, Local League 
Management may fill the slot and at its discretion, require the new 
team to arrange make-up matches or require the new team to start 
in last place.
c. There will never be two byes in a schedule. If a second bye is 
created, Local League Management will issue a new schedule to 
eliminate the byes.  The new schedule may result in changes to the 
home and away pattern as well as different matchups.
Unless otherwise specified in your Local Bylaws, byes will be scored  
as follows:
• 8-Ball Divisions (Open & Doubles) - Eight points.
• 9-Ball Divisions (Open & Doubles) - 60 points.
• Ladies 8-Ball and 3-Person 8-Ball Divisions - Five points.
• Ladies 9-Ball and 3-Person 9-Ball Divisions - 40 points.
• Masters Divisions - 15 points.
• Junior Divisions - Check your Local Bylaws.
15. FORFEITS
A team match will result in a forfeit if a player is not at the table and 
ready to begin within 15 minutes of the appointed time. Real Time, as 
opposed to Bar Time, is the official League Time. Occasionally a new 
team misreads, or misunderstands the schedule. Some leniency will be 
granted where new teams or new divisions are involved. Teams joined 
to play, not to receive forfeits. Full weekly fees are due by both 
teams, regardless of how many individual matches are played.  
The following rules pertain to forfeits:
a. A team may begin play with only one player 
present. Once a team match begins, play 
must be continuous. Upon completion of each 
individual match, the team must have another 
player available to play or the remaining 
match(es) will be forfeited. If a team does 
not have a player present for the next individual match, then 
forfeit points are awarded to the opponent. Forfeits do not count 
as matches played. Forfeit points are awarded only if the non-
forfeiting team has a player present for the match in question, who 
does not cause the team to break the Team Skill Level Limit rule. onCE A MA tCH 
bEgins , PlAY 
Must b E 
Continuous

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 26b. In the event both teams cannot field a player for a match, neither 
team will be awarded any points. For example, if one team can field 
four players and the opposing team can only field three players, 
forfeit points are awarded for the fourth match and neither team is 
awarded points for the fifth match. To record a forfeit, write down 
the name of the non-forfeiting team's player, their player number, 
and the non-forfeiting team number. Then write "forfeit" in the 
space provided for the name of the forfeiting team's player.
c. If a team finds it necessary to forfeit individual matches due to a 
shortage of players, the forfeit(s) must be the last match(es) . If 
a team knows they will be short players, they cannot choose which 
individual matches to forfeit.
d. Deliberate forfeits will not be tolerated.  If Local League 
Management determines that a team deliberately forfeited a 
match, or conspired to receive a forfeit, the team or teams involved 
will be subject to penalties.
e. Team matches may be rescheduled if both Team Captains agree 
and receive approval from Local League Management.  All make-
up matches must be played using current skill levels.
Unless otherwise specified in your Local Bylaws, forfeits will be scored 
as follows:
• 8-Ball Open - Two points are awarded for a forfeited individual 
match during regular session play; three points in Playoffs and 
Tournaments. Eight points are awarded for a full team forfeit.
• 9-Ball Open - Up to 15 points are awarded for a forfeited individual 
match during regular session play; 20 points in Playoffs and 
Tournaments. 60 points are awarded for a full team forfeit.
• Ladies 8-Ball and 3-Person 8-Ball - Two points are awarded for a 
forfeited individual match during regular session play; three points 
in Playoffs and Tournaments. Five points are awarded for a full team 
forfeit.
• Ladies 9-Ball and 3-Person 9-Ball - Up to 15 points are awarded 
for a forfeited individual match during regular session play; 20 
points in Playoffs and Tournaments. 40 points are awarded for a full 
team forfeit.

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 27• Doubles - Two points are awarded for a singles 8-Ball match, and 
up to 15 points are awarded for a singles 9-Ball match. The doubles 
match will be awarded double points (4 for 8-Ball or 30 for 9-Ball).
• Masters - Five points are awarded for a forfeited individual 
match during regular session play; seven points in Playoffs and 
Tournaments. 15 points are awarded for a full team forfeit.
• Juniors -  Check your Local Bylaws.  
16. CONCERNING TEAMS THAT DROP OUT
A team that drops out during a session will be required to pay all 
past dues, the balance of all dues they would have owed had they 
completed the session, and two weeks’ fee deposit (which will be 
applied to the final weeks of the session) before they would be allowed 
to rejoin the League.
A player who was on such a team, and who wishes to rejoin the 
League, must first pay their share (calculated by taking the total 
amount owed by the team that dropped and dividing it by the number 
of players on that team's roster at the time the team dropped) before 
being reinstated. However, the Team Captain may not be eligible for 
reinstatement until the full amount owed by the team is collected.  
17. SPLITTING MATCHES
A team match is normally played on one table. Occasionally, lengthy 
matches make it logical to split a team match onto a second table, if a 
second table of the same size is available. If the fourth match has not 
started by two hours after the official League start time, teams should 
put up their next player and start play on a second table. The fifth 
match would then be played on the first table that becomes available. 
If the fifth player is not present, a forfeit cannot be called until the 
fourth match has concluded.
A team is subject to penalties if it deliberately prevents a second table 
from being available, or resists using the second table to split the 
match. The option to split matches can only be waived if both teams 
agree to complete the match on one table.  

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 2818. COACHING
Coaching is defined as giving advice to a teammate during their 
turn at the table. What constitutes as coaching is sometimes open to 
interpretation. Therefore, when your opponent finishes their turn, you 
are advised not to continue talking to your teammates. Go to the table 
and begin your turn.
NOTE 1:  A time-out must be called before coaching begins.
NOTE 2:  Ineligible players cannot coach or participate in a  
group consensus. 
NOTE 3:   A team can only be charged with a time out after the rack 
has been struck in any individual game.
Comments that relate to the game situation are considered  coaching. 
Some examples of comments that will be deemed  
coaching are:
• Which ball to shoot, except in 9-Ball.
• Where to leave the cue ball.
• Whether to shoot soft or hard.
• Whether to use english.
• Whether to play safe or defensive.
Some examples of comments that are NOT considered coaching are:
• Telling a player if they have solids or stripes (8-Ball).
• Telling a player to mark the pocket when shooting the 8-ball.
• Reminding a player which is the next ball in the rotation (9-Ball).
• Giving advice or placing the cue ball before the break.
• Reminding a player to chalk up.
• Telling a player a foul has occurred.
• Answering a player’s question concerning rules.
• Comments such as “good hit” or “nice shot”.
• Conversations with or comments to a player when it is not their turn 
at the table.

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 29Be courteous to your opponent and observe the following  
coaching guidelines:
a. Any eligible member of the team can be the coach. A coach does 
not have to be designated until a time-out is called, and a different 
coach can be designated for each time-out.
b. Mark the time-outs with a “T” on the scoresheet to avoid confusion. 
Taking too many time-outs is not a foul, although consistent 
attempts to do so may result in a sportsmanship violation. It is up 
to a player to notify their opponent if they are out of time-outs.
c.  Any member of the shooting team may call for a time-out. In order 
to avoid confusion, say it loudly and clearly enough for all to hear.
d. If any member of the team suggests a time-out to the shooter, the 
time-out will be charged.
e. If the shooter requests a time-out, the coach may refuse it and no 
time-out will be charged.
f.  During their turn at the table, the shooter may discuss strategy only 
with the coach designated for that time-out. A coach may get a 
group consensus from other players on their team and pass it on to 
the shooter, but only the designated coach may pass it on.
g. Coaching should be limited to one minute or less. Violations of this 
guideline may lead to penalties.
h. Coaches may place the cue ball for a player in a ball-in-hand 
situation during a time-out.
i. Coaches may not mark the playing surface of the table or guide 
the shooter’s cue during the execution of the shot; however, it 
is permissible for a coach to place an item on the rail to indicate 
where to aim. The coach should leave the playing area before the 
shooter attempts their shot.
j. To avoid disputes, when your opponent’s turn is over, go to the 
table and begin your turn. Do not sit and talk with your teammates, 
as your opponent may think you are being coached. 
The number of time-outs permitted in each format are as follows:
• Open Divisions (8-Ball & 9-Ball) - Skill level 1, 2, 3 and unrated  
players (new to APA) receive two time-outs per game. Skill levels 4 
and higher receive one time-out per game.
• Ladies and 3-Person Divisions - Open Division rules apply.

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 30• Doubles Division -  Open Division rules apply for singles matches. 
One time-out per game, regardless of skill level, may be used 
during the doubles match.
• Masters Division - There are no time-outs.
• Juniors - Check your Local Bylaws.  
19. HOST LOCATIONS
Host Locations are not limited to bars, taverns and pool halls. Any 
establishment with a pool table is welcome to host a team, including 
recreation centers, bowling alleys, etc. Teams may not change their 
Host Location during a session unless the location closes, the location 
requests it or Local League Management approves the move.  
20. MAKE SURE YOU KEEP SCORE PROPERLY 
Accurate and conscientious scorekeeping is essential, especially when 
it comes to marking innings and Defensive Shots. Your scoresheet 
does not have to match your opponent’s. You keep your score and 
let your opponent keep theirs. Penalties will be assessed to teams or 
players that:
• Try to negotiate innings with their opponent.
• Coach their players to miss shots in an attempt to run up innings. 
Deliberate misses must be marked in the Defensive Shots block of 
the scoresheet.
• Encourage any team or player to improperly keep score.
Proper scorekeeping is the greatest contribution you can make to 
the smooth operation of The Equalizer® handicap system and the 
prevention of sandbagging. The Equalizer® works best when teams 
keep score properly.
Marking inaccurate information on a scoresheet, intentionally omitting 
information from a scoresheet, or agreeing or conspiring with others 
to falsely represent what occurred during a match on a scoresheet, 
may result in your suspension, or in the termination of your APA 
membership. Please report any team that you believe is not following 
proper scorekeeping procedures to Local League Management or to 
APA. More information and instructional videos on how to keep score 
are available at poolplayers.com.  

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 3121. DEFENSIVE SHOTS
A Defensive Shot is any shot taken without the intent to legally pocket 
a ball.  This definition includes, but is not limited to, shots taken in an 
attempt to hook the shooter’s opponent. The shooter’s INTENT is the 
determining factor. Unless the shooter declares 
that their shot was a Defensive Shot, it is up to the 
scorekeeper to decide if the shooter intended 
to try and pocket a ball.  Consistently and 
correctly marking Defensive Shots ensures the 
effectiveness of The Equalizer®.  
Defensive Shots fall into two basic categories: ethical and unethical.  
The scorekeeper should mark both types as Defensive Shots on the 
scoresheet. 
Ethical - There are several types of ethical Defensive Shots:
• Safety - A safety is a defensive action taken when the shooter has 
no makeable or high percentage shot, or chooses to leave their 
opponent in a difficult situation. 
• Legal Contact Only - Making legal contact with no intent to pocket 
a ball in an attempt to deny your opponent ball-in-hand.
• Picking Up the Cue Ball - Conceding your shot at the table by 
giving ball-in-hand to your opponent.
• Intentionally Shooting the Wrong Ball - Shooting at an 
opponent’s ball (8-Ball), or out of rotation (9-Ball), for the purpose 
of creating a more favorable table layout for the shooter.
Unethical -  Intentionally missed shots for the purpose of handicap 
manipulation.  Taking unethical Defensive Shots is a form of 
sandbagging.
NOTE 1:  An attempted Defensive Shot that results in the legal 
pocketing of one of the shooter’s category of balls (8-Ball) or the legal 
pocketing of any object ball (9-Ball) does not end the shooter’s turn. 
The shooter must continue to shoot, and the shot should be marked as 
a Defensive Shot.  
NOTE 2:  An attempt to pocket a ball and leave one’s opponent with 
a difficult shot if the attempt fails, is not considered a Defensive Shot.   
These shots are often called “two-way shots” because they have both 
offensive and defensive qualities. Two-way shots can be unethical if tHE sHootER’ s 
intEnt  is tHE 
DEtERMining  
fACtoR

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 32they are used to mask a player’s intent by making it appear as if there is 
an attempt to pocket a ball, when the true objective is to play a safety 
that is difficult for a scorekeeper to recognize.  Scorekeepers who 
observe shooters playing multiple two-way shots in a match should 
make a note on the scoresheet.
22. HANDICAP SYSTEM
The Equalizer® handicap system is designed to give each member a 
fair chance to win matches. Part of that system is subjective. When a 
player is deemed to be playing at a skill level that is below their true 
ability, their League Operator is authorized to make the player's team 
ineligible for Session Playoffs and subsequent Tournaments. When 
such a determination is made during the Session Playoffs, the League 
Operator may disqualify the team from the Playoffs and subsequent 
Tournaments. League Operators strive to make any disqualifications or 
ineligibility decisions within 15 days after the Session Playoff finals.
Each player is responsible for ensuring that their teammates’ skill levels 
reflect their true ability. If you think a teammate’s skill level is too low 
for any reason, simply call your Local League Management and ask 
them to consider raising the player’s skill level. There are many anti-
sandbagging measures built into The Equalizer®, but attempts to 
sandbag still impede APA's purpose of providing every player a fair 
chance to win every time they step to the table. Teams or members 
who attempt to sandbag will be subject to penalties ranging from 
warnings to membership termination.
Please report sandbagging to your League Operator, Division 
Representative or Board of Governors. For documentation purposes, 
all sandbagging concerns must be made in writing and will be kept 
confidential. This information will assist Local League Management 
to determine whether a player is trying to hold down their skill 
level. Teams or individuals guilty of conspiring to manipulate skill 
levels through dishonest practices, as determined by Local League 
Management, will be penalized.  
23. LOCAL LOWEST ATTAINABLE
Once you have 10 League matches on record (an established skill 
level) or you have been assigned a skill level, you will not be allowed 
to drop more than one skill level. Exceptions may be made in rare 

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 33instances of physical disability or other extreme circumstances which 
might permanently change the player’s ability to shoot.  
24. CHAMPIONSHIP LOWEST ATTAINABLE
Players who have participated in the Poolplayer Championships or 
World Pool Championships will receive a Championship Lowest 
Attainable (CLA).  APA maintains a permanent record of players who 
have participated in Championship events. Players may not compete 
at a handicap below their CLA. Some exceptions may be made, but 
only if Local League Management specifically appeals an individual’s 
CLA to APA’s Handicap Review Committee (HRC). Those appeals, if 
justified, will be granted.  
25. TEAM SKILL LEVEL LIMIT
All formats, with the exception of Masters, have a Team Skill Level 
Limit. Each format's Team Skill Level Limit is indicated in the bullet 
points below. A team playing less than a full match must show that 
it would not have exceeded the Team Skill Level Limit, if all the 
matches had been played.  If the Team Skill Level Limit is broken, the 
offending team receives zero points for the entire team match. The 
non-offending team would receive:
• 8-Ball Open (23-Rule) - All points they won up to the point the 
violation occurred, plus two points for the match in which the 
23-Rule was broken and any subsequent individual matches.
• 9-Ball Open (23-Rule) - All points they won up to the point the 
violation occurred, plus 15 points for the match in which the 
23-Rule was broken and any subsequent individual matches.
• Ladies 8-Ball and 9-Ball (13-Rule) - All points they won up to the 
point the violation occurred, plus two points (15 points in 9-Ball) 
for the match in which the 13-Rule was broken and any subsequent 
individual matches.
• 3-Person 8-Ball and 9-Ball (14-Rule) - All points they won up to 
the point the violation occurred, plus two points (15 points in 9-Ball) 
for the match in which the 14-Rule was broken and any subsequent 
individual matches.
• Doubles Formats (10-Rule) - Check your Local Bylaws.
• Juniors - Check your Local Bylaws.

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 34NOTE 1:  Once both teams have declared a player, the players cannot 
be changed unless the Team Skill Level Limit rule is in jeopardy.
NOTE 2:  It is permissible for a team to count the skill level of an 
eligible player who is on the roster but not present at the match site 
towards the Team Skill Level Limit.
NOTE 3: During Playoffs, Tri-Annuals, World Qualifiers and the World 
Pool Championships, an ineligible player’s skill level may not be used 
towards the Team Skill Level Limit.
When forming a new team, be cautious about the number of highly 
skilled players you recruit. Teams that cannot comply with the Team 
Skill Level Limit rule must play:
• Open Divisions (8-Ball & 9-Ball) - Four players whose combined 
skill levels do not exceed 19, and forfeit the fifth match. If the team’s 
skill levels increase to the point where the skill levels of the lowest 
four players on the roster exceed 19, then they can play three 
players to 15 and forfeit the fourth and fifth matches.
• Ladies Divisions - Two players whose combined skill levels do not 
exceed 10, and forfeit the third match.
• 3-Person Divisions -  Two players whose combined skill levels do 
not exceed 11, and forfeit the third match.
• Doubles Divisions - The sum of the Highest Skill Levels of each 
team’s members must equal, or be less than, 10 at the start of  
the division. 
• Junior Divisions -  Check your Local Bylaws.
A violation of the Team Skill Level Limit rule has officially occurred 
when the rack is struck in the individual match that causes the 
violation. If your opponent violates the Team Skill Level Limit, notify the 
opposing Team Captain.
26. LIMITED NUMBER OF SENIOR SKILL LEVEL 
PLAYERS (8-BALL AND 9-BALL)
Senior Skill Level players are those who have a skill level of 6 or higher. 
Teams may not field more than two Senior Skill Level players in a 
match. A violation of the rule has officially occurred when the rack 
is struck in the individual match involving a third Senior Skill Level 
player. The ineligible player forfeits the individual match and the 

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 35teams go on to the next match, keeping all points earned in previous 
individual matches. The skill levels of both players will count towards 
the Team Skill Level Limit for that match. If a third Senior Skill Level is 
used, the points earned by the third Senior Skill Level player will not 
count and the non-offending team will receive forfeit points for that 
individual match.
NOTE:  Once both teams have declared a player, the  players cannot 
be changed unless the Limited Senior Skill Level rule is in jeopardy.  
27. SESSION PLAYOFFS
All the rules governing regular session play apply during Session 
Playoffs. Playoffs and Championship matches, with the exception of 
forfeits, are scored the same as regular League play.
The first team to reach a match point total that the opposing team 
cannot overcome is the winner. Therefore, Playoff matches often end 
before all individual matches are complete. Once a player has reached 
the number of racks or balls necessary to secure the win for their team, 
simply stop the match and write "Incomplete Match"  or "DNF"  (Did 
Not Finish) on the scoresheet. The two teams cannot agree to continue 
the match, because the scoresheet must show where the match 
actually ended.
Unless a different Playoff structure is specified in your Local 
Bylaws, the following process will be observed:
At the end of each session there is a Playoff in each division among 
the top finishing teams and a wild card team. The team that wins 
the Playoffs wins the award(s), the division title for that session 
and also becomes qualified for the Local Level of the World Pool 
Championships referred to as the World Qualifier. A team does not win 
the division title, or qualification, by earning the most points during the 
session. Point standings determine team seeding in the Playoffs. Full 
weekly fees are collected during the Playoffs.
During the semifinals, the first place team plays the wild card team and 
the second place team plays the third place team. In the finals, the two 
semifinal winners play each other for the division title.
Session Playoff Site Selection
The Session Playoff site will be chosen at or prior to the Team Captains’ 

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 36Meeting at the beginning of the session and will be indicated on the 
schedule. Playoff matches may be held at a neutral location or at the 
home location of one or both of the teams involved.
How The Wild Card Team Is Selected
After the final week of play, the League Operator, or their designated 
representative, in the presence of witnesses, will conduct the wild 
card draw. Teams that do not make the Playoffs are eligible for the 
draw, unless they forfeited more than five individual matches during 
the course of the session, are not current with all League fees or are 
deemed ineligible by the League Operator.
Tie-Breaking Procedures
It will happen quite often that teams will finish a session tied for 
a position. The following tie-breaking procedures will be used to 
decide which team places ahead of the other. In some cases, these 
procedures may only dictate the difference between first and second 
place; however, in other cases, they will decide which team(s) advance 
to the Playoffs.
If two teams are tied - Break the tie by letting their overall records 
against each other during regular session play decide the outcome. If 
they played each other more than once and the overall point total is a 
tie, only the last time they played each other will be considered. If the 
result is still a tie, the winner will be determined by the team that won 
the most individual matches the last time they played.
If three or more teams are tied - Break the 
tie by matching the teams against each other 
according to which teams involved met first on the 
schedule during the session. After the matching-
up, proceed as described above to determine a 
winner, and then match the winner against the 
other team in the tie as described above. The 
losing team is then out of further consideration 
and receives the lowest available "place" in the 
division standings of the tied teams.
If teams are tied and they did not play each other during the 
regular session -  Unless otherwise set out in Local Bylaws, the winner 
will be determined by who earned the most points in the last week of 
the regular session. If both teams earned the same number of points Click here to 
see examples 
on how to  
break ties.

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 37during the last week of the regular session, their point totals from the 
week prior would then be compared in order to determine a winner. 
Continue with this approach until the tie is broken.
Ties In Playoff Matches
In case of a tie at the end of a Playoff match, the number of individual 
matches won by each team will determine the winner using the 
following methods:
• Open Divisions (8-Ball & 9-Ball) - If after four matches, the team 
match is tied and neither team can field a fifth player, the team that 
won two individual matches first will be declared the winner.
• Masters, Ladies & 3-Person Divisions -  If after two matches the 
team match is tied and neither team can field a third player, the 
team that won the first individual match will be declared  
the winner.
• Doubles Divisions (8-Ball & 9-Ball) - If a Playoff match ends in a 
tie, the team that won the doubles match will be declared  
the winner.
• Junior Divisions - Check your Local Bylaws.
Participation In Session Playoffs
For a player to participate in Session Playoffs, they must have played 
at least four times with that team during the session. Local Bylaws 
may impose additional Playoff eligibility requirements. A team with 
an ineligible player on its roster may NOT use that player’s skill level 
towards the Team Skill Level Limit. If an ineligible player is used, then 
a violation of this rule officially occurs when the rack is struck in the 
ineligible player’s match. The ineligible player forfeits the match and 
the teams go on to the next individual match. The skill levels of both 
players count toward the Team Skill Level Limit rule for that match. 
Once the team match is over and one of the teams has left the match 
site, or the scoresheets are signed by both Team Captains, the match 
will stand as played, even if an ineligible player(s) has competed. The 
number of matches played by each player is prominently displayed on 
each week's scoresheets. 
Byes and forfeits do not count as matches played.  

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 3828. AMATEUR PLAYERS ONLY
APA is an amateur League. APA reserves the right to reject or 
cancel the memberships of those individuals who are deemed to 
be professionals or possess abilities above amateur status. APA has 
a variety of criteria for determining amateur/professional status. 
The criteria include: possessing a tour membership in any men’s or 
women’s professional billiards organization, winning tour points from 
any of those organizations, being a nationally known money player 
in APA's judgment, or otherwise being recognized as a billiards 
professional, billiards celebrity or entertainer including being a noted 
exhibition performer, retired professional, etc. APA reserves the 
right to rule on the amateur/professional status of any member, and 
may consider all, some, or none of the above criteria in making its 
ruling. Players who enter a professional event, perform exhibitions or 
otherwise behave as a professional, place their amateur status at risk, 
and may be declared ineligible to be a member of APA.
Local League Management has the option of prohibiting any 
individual from participating in the Local League who has consistently 
demonstrated characteristics exceeding amateur status, is a known 
money player or is perceived as earning a substantial portion of their 
living playing pool. An individual who gives exhibitions or lessons 
for money may be deemed a professional.  Similarly, a highly skilled 
individual who is employed as a manager/assistant manager of a 
billiard room may be categorized as a house pro and thus be ineligible 
for amateur play. However, a person cannot be deemed a professional 
simply because they are a highly skilled pool player. There are many 
highly skilled amateurs who do not otherwise exhibit professional 
characteristics, who are welcome to play in APA.  
29. EQUIPMENT
Laser devices, mechanical cues and training/practice aids may not 
be used in League play. Special equipment, such as bridges and cue 
extenders, are legal.  Some specialty cues may be allowed on a limited 
basis. Players are expected to use equipment consistent with its 
intended purpose. Additional equipment guidelines and rules of use 
applicable during League play are set forth below:
• Jump Cues - Only allowed in Masters Divisions.
• Break Cues - Sometimes combined with jump cues to form a jump-

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 39break cue. These cues are allowed in League play for breaking. 
They may only be used to perform jump shots or massé shots in 
Masters Divisions.
• Regular Shooting Cues - These cues may be used to perform 
jump shots, massé shots and break shots in all APA League and 
Tournament play. You may not “break down” your Regular Shooting 
Cue to perform a jump shot.
NOTE 1: Using a regular shooting cue to break does not qualify it as a 
“break cue”.
NOTE 2: Wheelchair players, juniors and players who are limited in 
their height are allowed to use a junior cue or “shortie” as a regular 
shooting cue.
NOTE 3: You may change cues and/or cue shafts during a game 
provided the cues and/or shafts you are switching to do not violate any 
rules of use, and you remain within the time guidelines.
If you have questions about whether the use of a piece of equipment, 
not otherwise covered by these rules, will be permitted during 
League, you must seek a ruling from APA before using the equipment.  
30. PLAYERS RECEIVING INCENTIVES
Players are not permitted to solicit or accept incentives to play for 
a location or for a team, as such activity puts the player's amateur 
status at risk and is contrary to the purpose of APA. Players soliciting 
or accepting incentives may be disqualified. Inappropriate incentives 
include, but are not limited to, free table usage or payment for all or a 
part of the player's membership or weekly fees.
It is acceptable for a Host Location to offer a particular benefit, 
or benefits, to all members participating in League play at their 
establishment. However, it is not acceptable for Host Locations to offer 
special deals to a particular player, or limited group of players.  
31. RULES ARE SUBJECT TO CHANGE
APA reserves the right to make all necessary rulings and rule 
modifications at any time. Any rule changes will be sent to your League 
Operator and will be made available to all members through posted 
bulletins, Team Captains’ Meetings, Social Media and/or publication 

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 40at poolplayers.com. APA also reserves the right to make exceptions to 
rules in order to promote fairness. 
32. PROTESTS AND DISPUTES
In general, all protests, disputes and complaints directed to Local 
League Management must be made by the Team Captain. Teams 
that disrupt League operations by making frivolous protests to Local 
League Management may be penalized. Most protests and disputes 
should be settled immediately by looking up the applicable rule(s) 
in this manual, and/or through the use of common sense and good 
sportsmanship. Your Local League Management will be available to 
answer questions during its hours of operation but may be unavailable 
to make rulings during League play.
You are encouraged to resolve as many disputes as possible on the 
spot. The procedure for settling disputes is as follows:
• If a dispute between two teams cannot be resolved by existing 
rules, the two players and Team Captains should resolve the issue 
through negotiation and compromise. Oftentimes a dispute can 
be easily settled by replaying the game. Once both teams have 
agreed to replay a game, no protest may be filed at a later time 
concerning the dispute that led to the replay. You cannot agree 
to a resolution with the idea that if you win, it is okay, but if you 
lose, you are going to protest.
• In the event the Team Captains cannot settle the dispute, they will 
both submit a written protest to the League Operator. The protest 
must describe the circumstances involved and include the $50 
protest fee from each team. The League Operator may rule on 
the protest/dispute or submit it to the Board of Governors. The 
decision of the League Operator or the BOG is final, and the loser 
of the protest will forfeit their $50. The winner will be reimbursed. 
You will lose your right to protest if you refuse to continue the 
match or refuse to attempt to resolve the issue through negotiation 
and/or compromise.
Once Local League Management has received your scoresheet, it is 
too late to protest. Know the rules and review the scoresheet before 
submitting it to your Local League Management. It is essential that all 
parties involved display good sportsmanship during the dispute itself. 
Poor sportsmanship and/or abusive behavior on behalf of any party 

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 41following a decision is likely to result in serious disciplinary action. 
Teams consistently involved in disputes may incur penalties ranging 
from point deductions to suspension or termination.  
33. APPEALS
Your League Operator automatically reviews all disciplinary actions 
recommended by the Board of Governors in your area, if any, and will 
notify you or your Team Captain of the decision. Once disciplinary 
action has been taken by your League Operator and/or by the BOG, 
you have the right to appeal the decision(s) of the League Operator 
and/or BOG to the APA Appeals Committee. You may not appeal  
the decision to the APA Appeals Committee until the BOG has ruled 
on the issue. If you wish to appeal disciplinary action to APA, you  
must submit a written appeal addressed to the APA Appeals 
Committee, at the address on the back of this manual, or through 
appeals@poolplayers.com. The appeal must state the disciplinary 
action taken and why you, or your team, believe APA should review the 
decision of Local League Management. APA has sole authority and 
absolute discretion to act on the matter and its decision shall be final.  
34. RIGHT TO REFUSE SERVICE
League Operators, in their sole discretion, have the right to refuse to 
do business with any individual, at any time, regardless of whether the 
individual’s membership is in good standing.  
35. APA IS THE HIGHEST AUTHORITY
The American Poolplayers Association is the highest authority 
concerning all League rulings.
APA does not, nor does it authorize its League Operators, or their 
employees, to discriminate against any individual based on race, 
creed, religion, gender, sexual preference, or any other criteria 
related to discrimination that has been established by the Federal 
Government.
All individuals who meet the minimum age requirements are eligible 
for APA membership, benefits and participation in APA programs 
unless they have violated rules that are specifically detailed in this 
Team Manual.

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 42APA and its League Operators will do their best to promote harmony, 
security and satisfaction among the APA members playing in 
the League, and will attempt to satisfy requests relating to team 
composition and the types of establishments that serve as Host 
Locations. However, APA cannot dictate, nor is responsible for, the 
composition of each team. Teams are typically made up of friends, 
relatives and/or co-workers and neither APA, its League Operators, 
or their employees, have the authority to guarantee any individual 
placement on any particular team.
APA team play typically takes place in public locations, such as billiard 
rooms, taverns and clubs. APA cannot force a team to participate in a 
location where the members of that team feel uncomfortable.

gEn ERA l Rul Es • 43GAME RULES
SECTION 3
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
It is impossible to cover every situation with rules. Common sense 
must prevail. Play within the Spirit of the Rules, as well as the written 
rule. Teams that try to gain an advantage by creating their own 
interpretation of rules are subject to sportsmanship violations. Win at 
the table and not from the chair.
8-Ball  is played with a cue ball and a rack of 15 object balls. The 
primary purpose of this game is for one player to pocket the solid balls 
numbered from 1 to 7 or the striped balls numbered from 9 to 15, and 
then pocket the 8-ball before their opponent. Each player’s category 
of balls is determined when the first player legally pockets a ball. For 
example, if the first ball pocketed in the game is the 3-ball, then that 
player must pocket the rest of the balls numbered 1 to 7 while the 
opposing player attempts to pocket all the balls numbered 9 to 15. 
The turn passes from one player to the next whenever the shooter fails 
to pocket a ball of their category or fouls. A player legally pocketing a 
ball of their category must continue to shoot.
The player who pockets their entire category of balls first, and then 
legally pockets the 8-ball, is the winner of the game. In League play, 
the 8-ball must be pocketed in a marked pocket.
NOTE:  In Masters Divisions, players have the option of calling, rather 
than marking, the 8-ball pocket.
9-Ball  is played with a cue ball and nine object balls numbered 1 
through 9. It is a rotation game, meaning the balls are shot in numerical 
order. The shooter must strike the cue ball into the lowest numbered 
ball on the table first. The game is over when the 9-ball is legally 
pocketed. A player retains their turn at the table as long as they strike 
the lowest numbered ball first, and legally pocket a ball. The shooter 
need not pocket the lowest numbered ball to continue shooting. For 
example, the shooter may strike the 1-ball into the 4-ball (a combination 
shot) thus pocketing the 4-ball and continue their turn at the table.  
On their next shot, the 1-ball must again be struck first. If the shooter 
shoots the lowest numbered ball into the 9-ball and pockets the 9-ball, 

gAME Rul Es • 44the game is over. In League play, balls 1 through 8 are worth one point 
each when pocketed and the 9-ball is worth two points.
NOTE:  In Masters Divisions, 9-Ball is not played by ball count/points. 
Each individual game is won when the shooter legally pockets  
the 9-ball.  
1. LAGGING
Players lag at approximately the same time to see who wins the first 
break. The ball that stops closest to the head rail wins. It is permissible 
to strike the head rail. If the lagged balls make contact with each other, 
both players fail to strike the foot rail during the lag, or a ball stops in 
the jaw of a pocket, re-lag. Failure to strike the foot rail, or striking a 
side rail, or any pocket, results in loss of lag. Players are discouraged 
from using the cue ball during the lag. Insisting upon lagging with 
the cue ball is considered a sportsmanship violation and should be 
reported to Local League Management. The winner of the lag breaks 
in the first game; from that point on, the winner of each rack breaks in 
the next game. Please note the following:
• In Masters Divisions, the winner of the lag will have choice of format 
or the break. Once the format has been chosen, the entire set of 
that format must be completed before moving to the other format.
• In Doubles Divisions, the lag does not count as part of the  
player rotation.  
2. RACKING
All balls should be frozen (touching) as tightly as possible. Balls are 
racked by the non-breaking player, with the head (front) ball on the 
foot spot. The breaking player may request and receive a rerack. The 
loser of the lag, and/or the loser of any subsequent game, racks for the 
opponent. In each format, the ball placement in the rack is as follows:
• 8-Ball - All 15 balls are racked in a triangle, with the 8-ball in the 
center. The remaining balls can be placed in any order.
• 9-Ball - The balls numbered 1 through 9 are racked in a diamond 
shape. The 1-ball is placed at the front of the diamond, the 9-ball 
in the center.  The remaining object balls can be placed in any 
order. When using coin-operated tables, teams have the option to 
substitute any unused balls (10-ball to 15-ball) for pocketed balls 

gAME Rul Es • 45following a short game; this will save both teams money during 
League night. The breaker can ask for the lowest available nine 
balls to be used in each game.
 Example:  If the 3-ball and 9-ball are made on the break (because 
a 9-on-the-Snap is a win, unless you scratch), you can use the 
10-ball and 11-ball in the next rack. The object ball sequence in 
the next game would be 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10 and 11. The 11-ball, in 
effect, is the “9-ball” (last ball) in this game. Do not use the 10-ball 
to replace the 3-ball, as this can be confusing. Shoot the balls in 
numerical order.  
3. BREAKING
The rack must be struck before a foul can occur.
A player must break from behind the head string 
for the break to be considered legal; in addition, at 
least four object balls must be driven to the rails or 
an object ball must be pocketed. The cue ball may 
not be shot into a rail before hitting the rack.
NOTE: A player who is physically unable to break due to a medical 
condition may pass the break to the opponent, but only with prior 
approval from Local League Management. Such occurrences should 
be marked as a Defensive Shot and an inning where appropriate. 
Players are not allowed to have a teammate break for them.
The cue ball's point of contact with the table is used to determine if 
it is behind the head string, also referred to as being in . To make this 
determination simply compare the head string, an imaginary line 
connecting the two diamonds that are second from the head rail (see 
Table Diagram, pg. 86), to the cue ball's point of contact. A ball that is 
dead-center on the head string is considered out , or not behind the 
head string.
The cue ball must make contact with the rack as follows to be 
considered legal:
• 8-Ball - The head ball or the second row of balls must be struck 
first. Failure to strike the head ball or second row of balls does not 
result in a foul.
• 9-Ball - The 1-ball must be struck first. Failure to strike the 1-ball 
first does not result in a foul.THE RACK 
MUST BE 
STRUCK 
BEFORE A 
FOUL CAN 
OCCUR.

gAME Rul Es • 46If the rack is struck, but the break does not qualify as legal, the balls 
are reracked by the non-breaking player and rebroken by the same 
breaking player.
If the rack is struck, but the break does not qualify as legal and results 
in a scratch , the balls are reracked and broken by the opposite player.
Breaking safe or soft is not allowed. Make a note on the scoresheet if 
you observe a player breaking safe or soft. Local League Management 
may issue penalties to teams and players who are not breaking hard. 
Breaking just hard enough to comply with this rule is not a guarantee 
against penalties. Break as hard as you can while maintaining control.  
4. AFTER THE BREAK
Various circumstances can occur upon completion of the break.  
They are:
• A foul on a legal break will result in ball-in-hand for the opponent.
• No balls are pocketed; it is the opponent’s turn.
• An object ball is pocketed; it is still the breaker’s turn. 
8-Ball
a. If a scratch occurs on the break, the opponent receives ball-in-
hand, which must be executed from behind the head string, 
shooting at a ball that is outside the head string. If an object ball is 
dead-center on the head string, or out, then it is playable. If it is in, 
the ball is not playable. If the two players cannot agree on whether 
an object ball is in or out, then a third party should be consulted. If 
a third party is consulted, the third party’s call is final. If no agreed 
upon third party is available, then a coin flip will decide the issue. 
To intentionally shoot at a ball that is in is a sportsmanship violation 
to be reported to Local League Management.
 NOTE: The cue ball must be in as previously noted before play 
can begin. This is not a foul; no penalty may be assessed. It is up to 
the opponent to check to be sure the cue ball is in before it is shot. 
If the cue ball is out, the shooter must readjust the cue ball to a 
position behind the head string.
b. If the 8-ball is pocketed on the break, it is a win unless the player 
fouls the cue ball, in which case it is a loss.
c.  If one or more object balls from one category are pocketed on the 

gAME Rul Es • 47break, that becomes the shooter’s category of balls.   
d.  If balls from each category are pocketed on the break (for example, 
two solids and one stripe), it is still an open table.
 The breaker has the option to shoot any ball except the 8-ball 
(which would be a foul); any ball pocketed without fouling counts. If 
the shooter makes one ball of each category on their second shot, 
the table remains open; a miss or foul on the second shot results 
in an open table for the opponent. If the opponent then pockets a 
ball and fouls, it is still an open table.
 NOTE:  During an open table, a player can shoot a combination 
involving stripes and solids; the legally pocketed ball will 
determine their category of balls for the remainder of the game. 
The 8-ball may not be used as the first ball in a combination shot, 
as it is never neutral.
9-Ball
a. A foul on a legal break will result in ball-in-hand for the opponent 
anywhere on the table. Pocketed balls, if any, stay down (are not 
spotted), except the 9-ball. Pocketed balls are marked as dead 
balls on the scoresheet.
b.  If the 9-ball is pocketed on the break, this is a win unless the 
player scratches, in which case the 9-ball (any other available high 
numbered ball is adequate) is spotted and the turn passes to the 
opponent. If the foot spot is occupied by another ball, the 9-ball 
is placed directly behind that ball and as close to the foot spot  
as possible.
c. If one or more balls are pocketed on the break, it is still the 
breaker’s turn.
NOTE: Push-outs are fairly standard in pro events and in the U.S. 
Amateur Championship; however, they are not allowed in APA 
handicapped competition. Masters Divisions are non-handicapped 
and follow U.S. Amateur Championship rules; therefore, the push-out 
is allowed, and any balls pocketed on a push-out will be spotted.  
5. SHOOTING THE WRONG BALLS
Occasionally, a player will foul by mistakenly shooting the wrong 
category of balls (in 8-Ball) or the wrong numbered ball (in 9-Ball). 

gAME Rul Es • 48The shooter may avoid a foul by asking the opponent which ball or 
category of balls they should be shooting. If asked, the opponent 
must answer honestly. If the shooter hits the wrong ball, a foul occurs 
as soon as the wrong ball is struck, regardless of whether the ball is 
pocketed or not.
NOTE: If a foul is not called before the shooter takes a subsequent 
shot, and makes legal contact with a ball of their actual category (in 
8-Ball) or the lowest numbered object ball on the table (in 9-Ball), it is 
too late to call the foul. In addition, the following rules will then apply 
depending on the format: 
• 8-Ball - Once a player makes legal contact with the 8-ball, the 
player assumes control of that category of wrongly pocketed balls 
and can win the game by legally pocketing the 8-ball. In addition, 
if the sitting player does not call a foul before the opponent’s 
turn ends, and subsequently contacts the wrong ball during their 
turn, both players will assume the new category of balls for the 
remainder of the game.
• 9-Ball - Any balls pocketed prior to the foul being called will be 
marked as dead balls, except the 9-ball, which will be spotted.
6. COMBINATION SHOTS
Combination shots are legal, but striking the correct ball first  
is required.
8-Ball - The 8-ball may not be contacted first. If a player does not 
pocket one of their balls, but pockets an opponent’s ball, they lose 
their turn. No pocketed ball is spotted.
9-Ball - The lowest numbered ball on the table must be struck first. 
A player is credited with all balls they legally pocket after striking the 
lowest numbered ball on the table.    
7. POCKETED BALLS
Balls must remain in a pocket to be legal. If any ball, including the cue 
ball, goes in a pocket, but bounces back onto the playing surface, it 
is not considered pocketed and must be played from where it lies. 
The shooter does not need to designate their intended ball or pocket 
during the shot, except when they are legally shooting the 8-ball.

gAME Rul Es • 49NOTE 1:  Once a ball has stopped all motion, it cannot move again 
without outside forces affecting it. Therefore, if a ball which has been 
hanging in a pocket for more than a few seconds suddenly drops, it is 
to be placed back on the table where it was originally sitting.
NOTE 2:  If two balls become jammed in a pocket and are leaning off 
the edge of the slate to some degree, they are deemed pocketed. 
Drop them in the pocket and resume playing unless doing so ends 
the game.  
8. BALLS ON THE FLOOR
Object balls that get knocked off the playing surface will be spotted 
on the foot spot. If the foot spot is taken, the ball will be placed directly 
behind the foot spot, as close to the foot spot as possible. If two or 
more balls are knocked on the floor, they are placed in numerical 
order with the lowest numbered ball closest to the foot spot. Spotted 
balls are placed frozen to one another.
• 8-Ball - It might occur that a player legally pockets a ball while 
simultaneously knocking some other ball(s) on the floor. In this 
situation, it is still their turn and the ball(s) is/are not spotted until 
their turn ends. If the ball on the floor is one of the shooter’s balls, 
then it is spotted when the shooter has pocketed all of their other 
balls. If it is the 8-ball that is knocked on the floor, the shooter loses 
the game.
• 9-Ball - Balls that get knocked off the playing surface will be 
immediately spotted on the foot spot. The 9-ball is spotted:
a. Anytime it is knocked off the table other than when it  
is pocketed.
b. Anytime it is pocketed and the shooter scratches or 
otherwise fouls.  
9. ACCIDENTALLY MOVED BALLS
Accidentally moved balls must be replaced, unless any of the 
accidentally moved balls make contact with the cue ball. If accidentally 
moved balls make contact with the cue ball, it is a ball-in-hand foul, 
and no balls get replaced.
• If the accidental movement occurs between shots, the ball must be 
replaced by the opponent before the shot is taken.

gAME Rul Es • 50• If the accidental movement occurs during a shot, all balls 
accidentally moved must be replaced by the opponent after the 
shot is over and all balls have stopped rolling.
NOTE:  An object ball that is in motion and makes accidental contact 
with a bridge, cue stick, pocket marker, etc. is not replaced.
If, during the course of the shot, another ball stops in the position 
previously occupied by the accidentally moved ball, the opponent 
must place the accidentally moved ball, in a fair manner, as close as 
possible to its original position.  
10. CLOSE HITS
Potential bad hit situations are usually fairly obvious. Disputes over 
these situations can almost always be avoided by having a third party, 
agreed upon by both shooters, watch the shot. The sitting team 
should protect itself by stopping the game prior to the shot. The 
shooter is required to stop if their opponent wants the shot watched. 
Once an agreed upon third party is asked to watch the shot, the third 
party's call will stand and cannot be disputed.
In general, the shooter has the advantage in close hit situations. If 
the outside party cannot determine which ball was struck first, such 
as a simultaneous hit, the call goes to the shooter. Teams involved 
in repeatedly calling bad hits without third party verification may be 
subject to a sportsmanship violation and may have points deducted at 
the discretion of Local League Management.
NOTE: If a third party is not asked to watch the hit, and the hit is 
disputed, the call will tend to favor the shooter.
11. ONE FOOT ON THE FLOOR
When a bridge is available, at least one foot must be on the floor while 
shooting. Failure to keep at least one foot on the floor is not a foul, but 
may result in a sportsmanship violation. Local League Management 
cannot guarantee the presence of a bridge, and some Host Locations 
do not have them. A team that carries their own bridge may only use it 
if they are willing to share it with the opposing team since refusing to 
do so would provide an unfair advantage. If a bridge is not available, 
House Rules prevail.

gAME Rul Es • 51• Players shooting from a wheelchair - Players shooting from a 
wheelchair must remain seated in their wheelchair while shooting. If 
a player decides to exit the wheelchair to perform a shot, they must 
fully exit the chair. Players may not execute shots while “half-in, half-
out” of a wheelchair.
NOTE:  Players who have a legitimate need to use a stool, due to their 
height, are allowed to use one, provided they are able to move the 
stool by themselves and keep both feet on the stool. Additionally, when 
racking they may stand on a stool or have a teammate assist them.
12. MARKING THE TABLE
No one is allowed to mark the cloth in any way, including, but not 
limited to, using chalk to draw a line or wetting a finger to dampen the 
cloth. Teams may be subject to sportsmanship violations for marking 
the cloth. It is permissible to set a piece of chalk on the hard surface of 
the rail.  
13. STALEMATES
In the unlikely event that a game should become stalemated, meaning 
that neither player can, or wants to, make use of ball-in-hand, the 
balls are reracked and the player that had the break at the start of 
the stalemated game breaks again. A game shall be considered a 
stalemate when both players or teams agree. There is no minimum 
number of turns that must occur before a game is stalemated.
To score a stalemated game in: 
• 8-Ball - Put an “X” across the entire game box. The innings and 
Defensive Shots for the stalemated game do not count.
• 9-Ball - The game ends but the points earned stand. The innings 
and Defensive Shots remain and all balls left on the table are 
marked as dead balls.
14. FROZEN BALLS
A frozen ball is a ball that is touching either another ball or a rail. In 
order for the frozen ball rule to be in effect, the ball must be declared 
“frozen” and verified as such by the shooter and their opponent. If the 
players in the match cannot agree, an agreed upon third party may be 
asked to determine if a ball is frozen.

gAME Rul Es • 52Object ball frozen to a rail - To make a legal shot, after contacting a 
ball that is frozen to a rail, the shooter must either:
• Drive the cue ball to any rail after the cue ball touches the  
frozen ball.
• Drive the frozen ball to another rail or into a pocket.
• Drive the frozen ball away from the rail and into another ball which, 
in turn, causes the frozen ball to hit any rail or go into a pocket, or 
causes the other ball to hit any rail or go into a pocket.
To make a legal shot, after simultaneous contact between a frozen ball 
and the rail it is frozen to, the shooter must either:
• Drive the cue ball to another rail.
• Drive the frozen ball to another rail or into a pocket.
• Drive the cue ball off the rail and into another ball which, in turn, 
causes the cue ball to hit any rail, or causes the other ball to hit any 
rail or go into a pocket.
• Drive the frozen ball off the rail and into another ball which, in turn, 
causes the frozen ball to hit any rail, or causes the other ball to hit 
any rail or go into a pocket.
Cue ball frozen to your own object ball (8-Ball) / lowest ball in the 
rotation (9-Ball) - Shooting the cue ball towards, or partly into the 
frozen ball, thereby making the ball move by such a shot, constitutes 
legal contact. Shooting the cue ball away from the frozen ball does not 
constitute legal contact. To make legal contact, after shooting away 
from the frozen ball, the cue ball must:
• 8-Ball - After separating from the frozen ball, contact another 
object ball of the shooters category first, or come back and contact 
the previously frozen ball first.
• 9-Ball - After separating from the frozen ball, come back and 
contact the previously frozen ball first.
NOTE:  If the cue ball is shot away from your own frozen object ball 
(8-Ball) / frozen lowest ball in the rotation (9-Ball), and the frozen ball 
moves slightly due to breaking contact with the cue ball, it does not 
constitute legal contact.
Cue ball frozen to your opponent's object ball (8-Ball) / non-
lowest ball in the rotation (9-Ball) - You must shoot away from the 

gAME Rul Es • 53opponent's frozen object ball (8-Ball), or the frozen non-lowest ball 
in the rotation (9-Ball). If the shooter shoots towards, or partly into 
the frozen ball, thereby making the frozen ball move by such a shot, it 
constitutes illegal contact and it is a foul.  
NOTE: If the cue ball is shot away from your opponent's frozen object 
ball (8-Ball) / non-lowest frozen ball in the rotation (9-Ball), and the 
frozen ball moves slightly due to breaking contact with the cue ball, it 
does not constitute illegal contact, and is not a foul.
15. FOULS
If any of the following fouls are committed, the penalty is ball-in-hand 
for the opposing player. Make certain you have ball-in-hand before 
you touch the cue ball by confirming it with your opponent. Ball-in-
hand is the advantage given to a player when their opponent scratches 
or otherwise fouls, whereupon the player may place the cue ball 
anywhere on the playing surface.
EXCEPTION:  In 8-Ball, a scratch on the break requires the ball-in-hand 
to be executed from behind the head string and contact made with a 
ball outside the head string.
Even after having addressed the cue ball a player may, if not satisfied 
with the placement, make further adjustments with their hand, cue 
stick or any other reasonable piece of equipment.
Only the player or the Team Captain may officially call a foul, although 
anyone may suggest to the player or the Team Captain that a foul 
should be called.
NOTE: A foul that is not called when it occurs cannot be called once 
the next shot has been taken.  
These are the only fouls resulting in ball-in-hand. All other violations 
are sportsmanship violations. The ball-in-hand fouls are:
a. If the cue ball goes in a pocket, on the floor, or otherwise ends up 
off the playing surface.
b. Failure to hit the correct ball first.
c.  Failure to hit a rail or pocket a ball after contact. A rail must be 
struck by either the cue ball or any other ball after the cue ball 
contacts the object ball. If the ball bounces back onto the playing 
surface, it is considered to have struck a rail.

gAME Rul Es • 54d. If, after contacting a ball that is frozen to a rail, the shooter fails to: 
• Drive the cue ball to any rail after the cue ball touches the 
frozen ball.
• Drive the frozen ball to another rail or into a pocket.
• Drive the frozen ball away from the rail and into another ball 
which, in turn, causes the frozen ball to hit any rail or go into 
a pocket, or causes the other ball to hit any rail or go into a 
pocket.
 If, after making simultaneous contact between a frozen ball and the 
rail it is frozen to, the shooter fails to:
• Drive the cue ball to another rail.
• Drive the frozen ball to another rail or into a pocket.
• Drive the cue ball off the rail and into another ball which, in 
turn, causes the cue ball to hit any rail, or causes the other ball 
to hit any rail or go into a pocket.
• Drive the frozen ball off the rail and into another ball which, in 
turn, causes the frozen ball to hit any rail, or causes the other 
ball to hit any rail or go into a pocket.
e. Intentionally scooping the cue ball over another ball.
f.  Receiving advice regarding game strategy from a fellow player, 
other than your designated coach, during a time-out.
g.  Touching or causing the cue ball to move, outside of a ball-in-
hand situation.
h. Altering the course of a moving cue ball, including a double-hit.
i.  Anytime the cue ball makes contact with an accidentally moved ball.
j.  The cue ball does not touch any object ball during the course of  
a shot.
k.  Touching another ball on the table, while placing or adjusting the 
position of the cue ball, during a ball-in-hand.
Doubles Only -  Shooting Out Of Rotation. Once a team has shot out 
of rotation, the foul has occurred. If the sitting team does not call the 
foul before the next shot is taken, they do not receive ball-in-hand and 
the team that shot out of rotation will assume the new rotation for the 
remainder of the match.

gAME Rul Es • 55• 8-Ball - If the 8-ball is pocketed during the shot, it is loss of game,  
if called.
• 9-Ball - If the 9-ball is pocketed during the shot, the 9-ball is 
spotted and the opponents receive ball-in-hand.  
16. HOW TO WIN A GAME
8-BALL
a. You pocket all the balls of your category and legally pocket the 
8-ball in a properly marked pocket.
b. Your opponent pockets the 8-ball out-of-turn or knocks the 8-ball 
on the floor.
c. Your opponent pockets the 8-ball in the wrong pocket.
d. Your opponent fails to properly mark the pocket where the 8-ball is 
pocketed, and you call loss of game.
e. Your opponent fouls the cue ball and pockets the 8-ball.
f.  Your opponent alters the course of the 8-ball or the cue ball in an 
attempt to prevent a loss.
g.  Your opponent scratches or knocks the cue ball off the table when 
playing the 8-ball.
NOTE 1:  If your opponent is shooting at the 8-ball and misses it 
altogether, commonly referred to as a table scratch, they have fouled 
and you receive ball-in-hand. You do not win because of this foul.
NOTE 2:  You may not play the 8-ball at the same time you play the last 
ball of your category. The 8-ball must be pocketed through a separate 
shot. If you pocket the 8-ball at the same time you pocket the last ball 
of your category, you lose the game.  
Marking the pocket
a. A coaster or some other reasonable marker must be placed next to 
the shooter’s intended pocket.
b. Marking the pocket with chalk is not recommended.
c. Both players may use the same marker.
d. Only one marker should remain on the table at a time.

gAME Rul Es • 56e. If the marker is already at the intended pocket from a previous 
attempt or game, it is not necessary to touch it, pick it up or 
reposition it.
NOTE:  Contacting a pocket marker with the 8-ball is not a foul and the 
shot stands.
9-BALL
You legally pocket the 9-ball.

gAME Rul Es • 57THE EQUALIZER®  
HANDICAP SYSTEM
S EC T ION 4 
APA developed its own unique handicap system, The Equalizer®, 
which makes it possible for players of all abilities to compete on a 
nearly even level. The Equalizer® requires lesser skilled players to win 
fewer games in 8-Ball, or earn fewer points in 9-Ball, to beat higher 
skilled opponents. In golf and bowling you give or get strokes or pins. 
In this League, you give or get games or points. The number of games 
or points players race to is determined by comparing their skill levels.
Accurate and conscientious scorekeeping is the greatest contribution 
every member can make to the smooth operation of The Equalizer®  
and to the prevention of handicap manipulation. The Equalizer® works 
best when teams keep score properly. The only way a team can get 
away with manipulating The Equalizer® is IF YOU LET THEM . Your 
Local League Management uses information from the scoresheet you 
submit to evaluate handicaps. You improve the League by keeping 
score according to the rules stated in this manual. Your efforts will 
be appreciated by your teammates, your fellow members, your Local 
League Management and APA.  
1. HOW HANDICAPS ARE DETERMINED
Your Local League Management reviews, calculates and updates 
players’ skill levels on a regular basis. Your skill level (SL) determines 
how many games you have to win in 8-Ball, or points you must earn 
in 9-Ball, in order to win your match. Calculating skill levels involves 
a number of factors and the application of specific mathematical 
formulas. The factors considered include, but are not limited to, 
the data on the weekly scoresheets, win/loss records, Tournament 
performance, feedback from Handicap Advisory Committees, and 
other considerations.

tHE Equ Aliz ER H AnDiCAP sY stEM • 582. HOW TO GET STARTED
Generally, all NEW players will start at a SL3.
NOTE 1:  Local League Management is authorized to assign a new 
player a higher starting skill level if they believe the higher skill level 
more accurately reflects the player's true pool playing ability.
NOTE 2: Players with an established skill level in the 8-Ball format 
will start play in 9-Ball with their 8-Ball skill level; players with an 
established skill level in the 9-Ball format will start play in 8-Ball with 
their 9-Ball skill level, unless they are a SL1, SL8 or SL9 in 9-Ball. A SL1 in 
9-Ball will begin as a SL2 in 8-Ball; a SL8 or SL9 in 9-Ball will begin as a 
SL7 in 8-Ball.
After your first match, your skill level is calculated. It is against the rules 
for a player to attempt to reestablish their skill level. You cannot rejoin 
the League or transfer to another League area and start playing as a 
non-rated player. You are obligated to disclose the fact that you are a 
former member or a current member in another League area and that 
you have an existing skill level.
3. GAMES MUST WIN CHARTS
Your skill level and that of your opponent will determine the number of 
games in 8-Ball or points in 9-Ball you will race to during your match. 
All scoresheets include a Games Must Win, or Points Required To Win 
chart to assist you on League night. 
In 8-Ball, find your skill level (singles) or combined skill level (doubles) 
along the left side of the chart and your opponent’s skill level along the Skill 
Level6 or 
less7 8 9 10 11 12
6 or less 2/2 2/3 2/3 2/4 2/4 2/5 2/5
7 3/2 3/3 3/3 3/4 3/4 2/4 2/5
8 3/2 3/3 3/3 3/4 3/4 3/5 3/5
9 4/2 4/3 4/3 4/4 4/4 3/4 3/5
10 4/2 4/3 4/3 4/4 4/4 3/4 3/5
11 5/2 4/2 5/3 4/3 4/3 4/4 4/5
12 5/2 5/2 5/3 5/3 5/3 5/4 5/5Skill 
Level2 3 4 5 6 7
2 2/2 2/3 2/4 2/5 2/6 2/7
3 3/2 2/2 2/3 2/4 2/5 2/6
4 4/2 3/2 3/3 3/4 3/5 2/5
5 5/2 4/2 4/3 4/4 4/5 3/5
6 6/2 5/2 5/3 5/4 5/5 4/5
7 7/2 6/2 5/2 5/3 5/4 5/58-ball g ames Must Win Chart 8-ball Doubles g ames  
Must Win Chart 
Your Opponent Your OpponentYou
You

tHE Equ Aliz ER H AnDiCAP sY stEM • 59top of the chart. Track to the right from your skill level and down from 
your opponent’s skill level until the two tracks meet. In that block, the 
first number is the number you race to, and the second is the number 
your opponent races to.
The 9-Ball charts indicate the number of points each skill level (singles) 
or combined skill level (doubles) is required to attain in order to 
win a match. The individual match is over once a player (singles) or 
team (doubles) attains the number of points indicated on the Points 
Required To Win Chart.
More information on The Equalizer® is available at poolplayers.com.Player's 
Skill LevelPoints  
Must Win
4 or less 19
5 22
6 25
7 28
8 31
9 35
10 38
11 42
12 46Player's 
Skill LevelPoints  
Must Win
1 14
2 19
3 25
4 31
5 38
6 46
7 55
8 65
9 759-ball Points Required 
to Win Chart 9-ball Doubles Points 
Required t o Win Chart

HoW t o u sE sC oREsHEE ts A nD sC oRE M AtCHE s • 60HOW TO USE SCORESHEETS 
AND SCORE MATCHES
SECTION 5
Scoresheets should be filled out neatly, completely, accurately 
and signed by both Team Captains. Penalties may be assessed for 
repeated illegible, incomplete or incorrect scoresheets.
NOTE: Failure to sign the scoresheet does not constitute a dispute  
or protest.
The following information is printed across the top of all scoresheets:
• Team Sheet For - The team number and name.
• For Week # - Indicates the current week of play followed by the 
number of weeks in the session, along with the date and time of  
the match.
• Division - The name of the division and session information.
• Division Rep(s) - The name and phone number of the person to 
contact if you have questions.
Start and End Times - All scoresheets have a space 
to record the start and end times of team matches in 
order to assist Local League Management in identifying 
teams with slow play issues. APA's goal is to have all 
teams "Home by 11."
• 8-Ball - The start time is located in the upper 
section of the scoresheet, to the right of the Skill 
Level Chart. The space for the end time is located in 
the upper section of the scoresheet, to the left of the 
Match Points Earned Chart.for information about keeping 
score through the s corekeeper 
App, Click Here.
Click here to 
watch APA's 
"Home b y 11" 
Video

HoW t o u sE sC oREsHEE ts A nD sC oRE M AtCHE s • 61• 8-Ball Doubles -  The space for Start and End Times is located in 
the upper left-hand corner, just below the APA logo.
• 9-Ball & 9-Ball Doubles - The space for Start and End Times is 
located along the top right-hand corner, on the scoring side of  
the scoresheet.
• Masters -  The space for Start and End Times is located in the upper 
right-hand corner.
Division Standings Through Last Week - The Division Standings are 
printed on each scoresheet and show each team's total points and the 
number of points each team earned the previous week.
Rosters - The scoresheet will include each team's roster along with 
each team's name, Host Location, membership numbers, skill levels 
(except in Masters Divisions) and the number of matches each player 
has played during the session. The scoresheet will also indicate if the 
team has any credits or past dues.
Remember to inform the opposing team of any roster changes 
prior to starting the team match. Indicate any roster changes on the 
scoresheet next to your team’s roster by doing the following:
• To Drop a Player - Draw a line through their name and write the 
word “drop” next to it.
• To Add a Player - Write the word "add" along with their name and 
skill level (except in Masters) by your team roster.
Declaring Players - Team Captains flip a coin to decide which team 
will declare the first player. A space is provided to assist in tracking 
which team chooses first in each match. That space is located:
• 8-Ball - Directly above the player name block, titled “Team #”.
• 9-Ball - The top left corner on the scoring side of the scoresheet.
Fees Section - Team Captains should complete the financial section, 
located in the lower left portion of the scoresheet. All money placed 
in the envelope with the scoresheet should be itemized. It is important 
to list annual membership dues along with the names of the members 
who are paying, as well as any non-standard payments. Players in areas 
with an electronic payment option should check their Local Bylaws for 
the information required in this section.

HoW t o u sE sC oREsHEE ts A nD sC oRE M AtCHE s • 62Table Size Section - The Equalizer® takes into consideration the size 
of the table(s) the match was played on. Mark the appropriate box to 
indicate the table size used for the match.
• 8-Ball & 8-Ball Doubles - It is located just below the Captains' 
Signature Section.
• 9-Ball & 9-Ball Doubles - It is located directly above the Captains' 
Signature Section.
Next Scheduled Match - The team number, name, date and location 
of your next scheduled match is shown in this section and can  
be found:
• 8-Ball & 8-Ball Doubles - Directly below the Table Size Section.
• 9-Ball & 9-Ball Doubles - Directly below the Rosters.
• Masters - Directly below the Captains’ Signature Section.
Message Center -  Located at the very bottom of all scoresheets, this 
area may be used by Local League Management to send messages to 
teams or by teams to write messages to Local League Management.  
HOW TO SCORE 8-BALL
A. Player Information
The winner of the lag is listed on top. Fill in the 
player's team number, last name and first initial, 
along with their player number shown next to 
their name on the team roster. Fill in the same 
information for the opponent on the bottom. 
Refer to the “Games Must Win” chart and fill in the 
number of games each player will need to win.
• Doubles Format - Fill in the team name, both players’ last names 
and first initials. Refer to the “Doubles Race Chart” on the scoresheet 
and fill in the number of games each team will need to win.
B. Innings And Time-Outs
An inning is a completed cycle in which both 
players (singles) or teams (doubles) have had a 
turn at the table. The player or team who won 
the lag shoots in the top half of each inning while 
the player or team who lost the lag shoots in the 
bottom half of each inning throughout the match. Do not MARK A n 
inning  siMP lY 
bECA usE tHE 
MA tCH is o VERClick here to 
watch a video 
on 8- ball 
scorekeeping

HoW t o u sE sC oREsHEE ts A nD sC oRE M AtCHE s • 63An inning is not complete, and therefore not marked, until the 
player (singles) or team (doubles) who lost the lag and is listed on 
the bottom, misses or fouls.
a. Game Blocks - Each game has its own block. All information 
pertaining to a game should be written in that game’s 
corresponding block, with the exception of Defensive Shots. In the 
game block:
• Track the number of innings in each game by marking a tally 
for each inning. Mark Complete Innings Only. If a player 
Breaks-and-Runs a rack, ending the game or match, an inning 
is not marked.
• Indicate who won the game by darkening the block in the 
right-hand portion of each game block (upper or lower) that 
corresponds with the winning player.
• Mark Early 8s (E8), 8-ball Scratch (8S), 8-ball Wrong Pocket 
(8WP), 8-on-the-Break (8OB), and 8-Ball Break-and-Run (BR) on 
your scoresheet in the game block in which they occurred.
• Indicate time-outs taken by marking a “T” in the corner triangles 
of the game blocks. Use the upper two triangles for the player 
or team listed on top and the lower two for the player or team 
listed on the bottom. Always mark the first time-out in the 
triangle on the left side of the game block.
b.  Total Innings Block - Total all the innings for the entire match and 
enter the number in this block.
C. 8-Break and 8-B & Run Blocks
There are separate blocks to record these accomplishments. Use the 
appropriate blocks to mark the total 8-ball breaks (8OB) and the total 
Break-and-Runs (BR) for each player.
D. Defensive Shots Block
Mark a tally for each shot where there is no INTENT 
by the shooter to legally pocket a ball of their 
category. Total and circle the number of Defensive 
Shots for each player at the end of the match. If 
there are no Defensive Shots in a match, write “No 
DS” in the block. Proper scorekeeping requires 
conscientious marking of intentionally missed shots 
and helps ensure the accuracy of all skill levels.Click here to 
watch a video 
on Defensive 
shots

HoW t o u sE sC oREsHEE ts A nD sC oRE M AtCHE s • 64NOTE: The marking of a Defensive Shot does not affect the marking 
of an inning; therefore, if the player listed on the bottom plays a 
Defensive Shot, mark both the Defensive Shot and the inning. If the 
player on top plays a Defensive Shot, only mark a tally in the Defensive 
Shots block.
E. Games Won Block
Record the total number of games won by each player (singles) or each 
team (doubles) at the end of the match.
F. Match Points Earned Block
The number of Match Points Earned is determined by the number of 
games the losing player (singles) or team (doubles) won, as indicated 
on the Match Points Earned chart on the scoresheet.
G. Running Total Block
Utilize the Running Total block to add up the Match Points Earned for 
each of the matches played.
H. Team Captains' Signature Section
a. Team Points: Fill in the total number of Match Points Earned by 
each team in the block provided at the end of the Team Captains’ 
signature line.
b. Captains' Signature:  Verify the total Match Points Earned for each 
team and sign both scoresheets.  
HOW TO SCORE 9-BALL
9-Ball scoresheets are two-sided. The scoring 
is done on the back side, with the rest of the 
information needed printed on the front side. In 
order to avoid discrepancies, scorekeepers should 
confirm the score after each rack. At the end of 
each rack, the points earned by the two players, 
plus the number of dead balls, will add up to 10.
A. Player Information
The winner of the lag is listed on top. Refer to the rosters to fill in the 
player's team number, player number, last name and first initial, and 
skill level. Refer to the “Points Required to Win” chart and fill in the 
number of points the player must earn to win the match. Fill in the 
same information for the player who lost the lag on the bottom.Click here to 
watch a video 
on 9- ball 
scorekeeping

HoW t o u sE sC oREsHEE ts A nD sC oRE M AtCHE s • 65B. The Score Section
The score section includes six rows. The top and bottom rows consist 
of numbers used for tracking points as the shooters pocket balls. The 
other rows are for recording the players' information, score, innings 
and dead balls.
Indicate points earned by diagonally crossing out a number on the 
top row for the player (singles) or team (doubles) listed on top, or the 
bottom row for the player (singles) or team (doubles) listed on the 
bottom. It is recommended you switch from left diagonal lines (\) to 
right diagonal lines (/) at the conclusion of each rack in order to help 
track how many points each player earned during each rack.  This 
practice helps you avoid point discrepancies.
NOTE: Balls 1 through 8 are worth one point each. The 9-ball is worth 
two points.
• Score:  There are two score lines provided, one for each player 
(singles) or team (doubles). Record the number of points earned by 
the player (singles) or team (doubles) at the end of each rack.
• Innings:  Make a tally mark to indicate each completed inning. 
An inning is a completed cycle in which both players (singles) or 
teams (doubles) have had a turn at the table. Separate the number 
of innings played during each rack by drawing a vertical line to 
the right of the tally marks at the end of each rack. An inning is not 
complete, and therefore not marked, until the player (singles) or 
team (doubles) who lost the lag, and is listed on the bottom, misses 
or fouls. If a player makes a 9-on-the-Snap or Breaks- and-Runs, 
mark 9OS or BR instead of zero.
 NOTE:  Mark Complete Innings Only. If a 
player (singles) or team (doubles) Breaks-and- 
Runs a rack, whether another game is needed 
to determine the outcome or not, the inning 
has not ended because the player's turn has not ended. An inning 
is never marked until the player (singles) or team (doubles) who lost 
the lag and is the bottom half of the inning throughout the entire 
match, misses or fouls.
• Dead Balls: Record any balls not credited to either player (singles) 
or team (doubles), such as ball(s) made during a scratch, ball(s) 
made during a foul, or on the table when the 9-ball is made or a 
stalemate occurs. The 9-ball is never a dead ball. It is spotted.MARK 
CoMP lEtE 
innings  onl Y

HoW t o u sE sC oREsHEE ts A nD sC oRE M AtCHE s • 66C. The 9-Snap and 9-B & Run Blocks
Mark a tally in the appropriate block to record 9-on-the-Snaps and 
Break-and-Runs for each player.
D. The Total Innings Block
Total all the innings for the entire match and enter the number in  
this block.
E. The Defensive Shots Block
Mark a tally for each shot where there is no INTENT  by the shooter to 
legally pocket a ball. Total and circle the number of Defensive Shots 
for each player at the end of the match. If there are no Defensive Shots 
played in a match, mark “No DS” in the block. Proper scorekeeping 
requires conscientious marking of intentionally missed shots and helps 
to ensure the accuracy of skill levels. The marking of a Defensive Shot 
does not affect the marking of an inning.
F. The Total Points Block
Enter the total number of points scored by each player (singles) or 
team (doubles). If a player (singles) or team (doubles) earns more 
points than the number required for them to win the individual match, 
do not mark the excess points.
G. Match Points Earned Block
The number of Match Points Earned is determined by the number  
of balls made by the losing player (singles) or team (doubles). Fill in  
the block using the Score of Match chart located on the front of  
the scoresheet.
• Singles Format: A total of 20 points are available in each match.
• Doubles Format:  A total of 40 points are available in each match.
H. Running Total Block
Utilize the Running Total block to add up the Match Points Earned for 
each of the individual matches played.
I. Team Captains' Signature Section
A space is provided along the bottom of the scoresheet for the Team 
Captain's signature, team name, team number and total Match Points 
Earned for each team.  

HoW t o u sE sC oREsHEE ts A nD sC oRE M AtCHE s • 67HOW TO SCORE MASTERS
Masters is a non-handicapped format; therefore, it is only necessary to 
indicate the winner of each game.
Once the players lag, the winner of the lag has the choice of format to 
be played first, 8-Ball or 9-Ball, or the first break in the match.
A. The Player Section
List the player who will break the first rack on top. Fill in the team 
numbers, players’ last names and first initials and the players’ numbers 
from the rosters above.
B. The Scoring Section
Once a format has been chosen, the entire set of that format must be 
completed before moving to the other format. There are separate 
blocks for each game in each format.
a. 9-Ball Games & 8-Ball Games: Write an “X” on the appropriate 
game block to indicate the winner of each game. Use the top row 
for the player listed on top and the bottom row for the player listed 
on the bottom.
b.  9OS, 9B&R, 8OB and 8B&R: Make a tally mark for each 9-on-the-
Snap, 9-Ball Break-and-Run, 8-on-the-Break and 8-Ball Break-and-
Run for each player. Use the top row for the player listed on top 
and the bottom row for the player listed on the bottom.
c. Score:  Write in the total number of games won by each player, 
using the top block for the player listed on the top and the bottom 
block for the player listed on the bottom.
C. Team Captains' Signature Section
A space is provided along the bottom of the scoresheet for the Team 
Captain's signature, team number and total Match Points Earned for 
each team.  
More information on scorekeeping is available at poolplayers.com.

Con DuCt Du Ring lEA guE Pl AY • 68CONDUCT DURING
LEAGUE PLAY
SECTION 6
All members are required to exercise good sportsmanship and 
proper conduct. Individuals who cannot conduct themselves in a 
sportsmanlike manner will be removed from the League. The purpose 
of this section is to outline what action(s) Local League Management 
are advised to take when misconduct occurs during League play. Your 
League Operator is responsible for imposing sanctions and penalties 
on those players and/or teams that fail to practice good sportsmanship 
or who don’t demonstrate proper conduct. The guidelines contained 
herein relate to PHYSICAL CONTACT and VERBAL ABUSE . There is 
room for judgment in some areas and not others.
When misconduct occurs, the League Operator can take immediate 
action, and/or follow-up action.
• Immediate Action  is an action that immediately impacts the result 
of the team match. Immediate action impacts the entire team, and 
may affect innocent individuals.
• Follow-Up Action is an action taken after the fact, specifically 
against the individual(s) involved in the misconduct.  
1. PHYSICAL CONTACT
Hostile physical contact is not tolerated. Hostile physical contact 
includes, but is not limited to, bumping, shoving, pushing, hitting or 
sexual contact. Although this contact normally involves members 
engaged in League play, Local League Management should impose 
a penalty when a non-member is involved if it is deemed the non-
member involved is associated with one of the teams. Whether a non-
member is associated with one of the teams is a judgment call to be 
made at the sole discretion of Local League Management.
Immediate Action - If hostile physical contact occurs, the match is 
over. There is one issue for the League Operator to resolve in such a 
situation: whether only one team was guilty of hostile physical contact 
or both teams were guilty of hostile physical contact. When hostile 

Con DuCt Du Ring lEA guE Pl AY • 69physical contact occurs, your League Operator must exercise one of 
the following two options:
a. Where only one team was involved. If it occurred during League 
play, the offending team loses all points. The non-offending team 
will receive bye points. If the match took place during Session 
Playoffs or any type of Tournament, the non-offending team would 
advance to the next round.
b. Where both teams were involved. If this occurred during League 
play, neither team would receive any points for the night. If it 
occurred during Session Playoffs or Tournament play, both teams 
would be disqualified.
Your League Operator has no alternative other than to implement one 
of these two options. Local League Management cannot consider 
who started it, nor should they consider whether the retaliation, if any 
occurred, was justified. The only way both teams can avoid the same 
penalty is for one of the teams to refuse to retaliate no matter what 
provocation they may have to endure.  
2. VERBAL ABUSE
Verbal abuse consists of any name calling, threats, sexual comments or 
any other language that could reasonably be considered harassment, 
an effort to provoke a player or team, or an attempt to cause 
embarrassment to the opponent. Local League Management will 
always have to make judgments in this area. 
Immediate Action -  If your League Operator can determine that only 
one team, or person associated with that team, engaged in verbal 
abuse, the individual match must be forfeited to the non-offending 
player. A team will be held responsible for any verbal abuse coming 
from the players on its roster, or anyone who is associated with the 
team. If your League Operator determines that the verbal abuse put 
the non-offending team in an unfair competitive situation, they have 
the discretion to declare a forfeit of the entire team match. If both 
teams engage in verbal abuse, your League Operator has discretion 
to penalize the teams or players by altering the final results of the 
team match or of individual match(es). If a team engages in verbal 
abuse during Session Playoffs or Tournaments, your League Operator 
has the authority to disqualify the team, as such behavior is  
extremely disruptive.  

Con DuCt Du Ring lEA guE Pl AY • 70NOTE:  It is not considered harassment to root for your team, but 
to ensure good sportsmanship and to avoid conflict, and potential 
penalties, do not do it while your opponent is shooting.
3. FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS
In addition to the actions a League Operator takes regarding verbal or 
physical abuse, they may also take follow-up actions. Follow-up action 
addresses the long-term issues related to incidents of misconduct. 
Through follow-up action, Local League Management has the 
opportunity to evaluate who started the problem.
Local League Management must take action against any member(s) 
involved in any incidence of physical contact that is associated in any 
way with League play. It is not acceptable for members to take their 
fight outside or to agree to meet and fight it out at a later date. If they 
do fight at a later date, and Local League Management determines it 
originated during League play, then Local League Management must 
take action. A fight that occurs outside, but during League time, will 
be treated the same as one that occurs inside. If a player threatens to 
wait outside until the match is over, Local League Management should 
rule that the entire team match is forfeited. A threat to commit physical 
abuse will be treated as if the person making the threat actually 
committed the threatened act. Local League Management must use 
its best judgment when determining what occurred and what the 
appropriate response is.
Follow-up action by Local League Management may result in penalties 
such as probation, suspension and permanent termination of a 
player’s or players’ APA membership. Local League Management has 
discretion regarding what penalty is appropriate, but the following 
guidelines should be observed:
a. Any person who starts a fight or brawl should have their APA 
membership terminated.
b. Generally, a person who gets into a fight or a brawl defending 
themselves should be suspended for at least one month, if it is 
their first violation of these Rules of Conduct, or longer if they have 
previously violated these Rules, or committed other sportsmanship 
violations.
c. Generally, a person who consistently uses foul, provocative or 
intimidating language should receive a six-month suspension, 

Con DuCt Du Ring lEA guE Pl AY • 71though the suspension could be longer if they have committed a 
prior violation of these rules, or committed other sportsmanship 
violations.
d. Generally, a person who engages in a lesser degree of verbal 
abuse should be placed on probation, or suspension, depending 
on what the Local League Management deems appropriate under 
the circumstances.
Probation Terms - A player who is placed on probation must be a 
current APA member and actively participating throughout the entire 
term of the probation to complete their probation period. Players who 
drop out or quit while on probation, and who later seek to return to 
League play, will be required to serve the amount of time that was left 
on their probation period at the time they dropped or quit.
Suspension Terms - Players who are suspended may not participate 
in any League activities and forfeit their eligibility to participate in 
any Tournament(s) that may occur during their suspension term. It is 
recommended that players who are suspended not attend League 
matches. Those that attend League matches while on suspension 
and are disruptive face stiffer penalties.  All suspension terms will be 
followed by a one-year probationary term.
Any individual or team suspended from League play will immediately 
lose certain other membership privileges, including but not limited to, 
eligibility and/or qualification for Tournaments, until the suspension  
is lifted.
Once a player is suspended, that player will not have the privilege  
to coach their team, keep score, strategize or put up players until  
their suspension has been lifted. Breaking this rule may result in a 
longer suspension.
You joined this League to have a good time and so did other 
members. Every member has the right to be treated in a sportsmanlike 
manner, and members who display offensive behavior will not be 
tolerated.  It is important that all team members be aware of APA's 
Rules of Conduct. Teams should consider dropping anyone from their 
roster who does not agree to comply with these rules. 

touRnAME nt i nfo RMA tion A nD Rul Es • 72TOURNAMENT 
INFORMATION AND RULES
SECTION 7
GENERAL TOURNAMENT INFORMATION
All APA Tournaments require participation in League play. 
Tournaments offered in your Local League area are subject to 
the eligibility and qualification requirements set by Local League 
Management and distributed prior to the event. In general, APA 
requires all Tournaments to be played using Official APA Game 
Rules and to pay back 100% of entry fees in some form. In some 
circumstances Tournaments may be specifically advertised as charity 
events or fundraisers and may pay back less than 100% of entries 
as long as it is communicated prior to the start of the event that the 
remainder is being donated.  
CHAMPIONSHIP TOURNAMENTS
In order to protect the integrity of its Championships, APA reserves the 
right to declare an area ineligible to participate if the League Operator 
does not accurately follow procedures outlined by APA, properly 
apply  The Equalizer® and/or take other necessary steps to ensure that 
players are properly handicapped.
1. Poolplayer Championships
The 8-Ball Classic and the 9-Ball Shootout are singles events tiered by 
skill level and seeded within each tier. The game rules are the same as 
those used during regular, handicapped League play. An entry fee is 
charged at the Local Level.
After you qualify, you are not required to pay any additional entry fees 
to participate at the Regional or Championship Levels. All of the rules 
pertaining to singles events are listed on the Local Qualifier Boards 
and at poolplayers.com.
a. Area Eligibility
 A League area must have at least 12 teams in the standard 8-Ball 
or 9-Ball format in order to qualify players to the corresponding 
Championship.

touRnAME nt i nfo RMA tion A nD Rul Es • 73b. Player Eligibility 
 To be eligible for the 8-Ball Classic or 9-Ball Shootout, a player:
• Must be at least 18 years of age.
• Must be a current member on an active team in the 
corresponding format.
• Must have an established  handicap in the corresponding 
format. An established handicap is one that is based on a 
minimum of 10 actual match scores.
• Must have a minimum of 10 actual match scores within the 
previous two years. Local Qualifier Board scores do not count 
towards the minimum requirement.
c. Tournament Structure
 The 8-Ball Classic and 9-Ball Shootout are divided into three levels: 
the Local Level, the Regional Level, and the Championship Level.
• Local Level – Local Qualifier Boards are generally run using a 
Single Elimination Format, though they may be run in a variety 
of ways, normally at the discretion of the individual running the 
Qualifier with approval of Local League Management. Local 
Qualifiers may be open to all players, or they may be grouped 
by skill level(s) or other criteria.
• Regional Level – Tournaments are run using a Modified Single 
Elimination Format. Participants are seeded with players at or 
near their own skill level. Separate Tournament brackets are 
used for each Skill Level Tier. The Regional Tournaments are 
divided into two Seasons. Players qualifying January 1 through 
June 15 will be eligible to participate in Season 1 Regionals, 
generally held in early October. Players qualifying between 
June 16 and November 30 will be eligible to participate in 
Season 2 Regionals, generally held in early March.
• Championship Level –  All participants receive Travel 
Assistance and paid accommodations at the Championship 
Tournament site. Tournaments are run using a Modified Single 
Elimination Format. Individual Champions will be crowned in 
each Skill Level Tier, in each format.

touRnAME nt i nfo RMA tion A nD Rul Es • 742. Showdown Series
The 8-Ball Doubles, 9-Ball Doubles, Jack & Jill, Ladies 8-Ball, Masters, 
Team Captains and Wheelchair Championships all have their own set 
of eligibility and qualification requirements available at poolplayers.
com. Some of the Showdown Series events take place alongside the 
Poolplayer Championships, while others are scheduled alongside the 
World Pool Championships. Event dates are also listed at  
poolplayers.com.
3. Junior Championships
The Junior Championships are open to members ages 7 to 18 at 
the time of the event, who are either enrolled as a student or have 
graduated from high school.
This event is a 9-Ball Modified Single Elimination Format Tournament, 
bracketed based on the number of participants and seeded by skill 
level.  First and second place winners are guaranteed trophies and 
other prizes.  Please refer to your Local Bylaws for eligibility and 
qualification requirements.  Additional rules and information are 
available at poolplayers.com.
4. U.S. Amateur Championships
The U.S. Amateur Championships are open to all players and consist 
of the U.S. Amateur Championship and the Womens U.S. Amateur 
Championship. They are the most prestigious non-handicapped 
Amateur Tournaments conducted by APA. Preliminary rounds are 
held in various locations throughout North America. Match play 
is a combination of 8-Ball and 9-Ball games. Rules and additional 
information are available at poolplayers.com.
5. World Pool Championships
The APA World Pool Championships include the 8-Ball and 9-Ball 
World Championships. Each year, in each format, a team is crowned 
World Champion. The Equalizer®, the General Rules and the Game 
Rules set out in this manual are used in every round of the World 
Championships.
a. Area Eligibility
 A Local League area must meet certain minimum team counts in 
order to send teams to participate in the World Championships. 
Once the minimums have been met, more teams participating in 
your area will mean more teams advancing from your area.
• A League area that has 20 or more standard 5-Person 

touRnAME nt i nfo RMA tion A nD Rul Es • 75teams in a format, participating in the Spring Session of the 
League year, is eligible to advance at least one team in the 
corresponding format.
• Areas with 19 or fewer teams are not eligible to advance a 
team. Only Open 8-Ball teams will count towards the minimum 
requirement in 8-Ball, and only Open 9-Ball teams will count 
towards the minimum requirement in 9-Ball.
b. Player Eligibility
 In order to participate in the World Championships a player must:
• Must be at least 18 years of age.
• Be a member of a World Championship qualified team.
• Have an established handicap based on a minimum of 10 
actual match scores in the corresponding format, prior to the 
end of the Spring Session leading into the World Qualifiers. 
Matches played during regular sessions, Playoffs and Tri-Annual 
Tournaments count towards this minimum requirement. Match 
scores obtained through participation in other events, prior 
to having an established handicap, will not count towards the 
minimum requirement.
• Have played at least four times with the team during the 
regular Spring Session (prior to Playoffs) leading into the World 
Qualifier. Local Bylaws may impose additional  
eligibility requirements.
c. Tournament Structure
 The 8-Ball and 9-Ball Championships consist of two levels: the 
Local Level and the World Level.
• Local Level - The World Qualifiers are held after the conclusion 
of the Spring Session, normally in late May or early June, and 
are conducted using Championship Rules.
• World Level - The 8-Ball and 9-Ball World Championships 
represent the culmination of the League year and are held in 
early to mid-August. Every team that makes it to the World 
Level is already in the money. Exact prize money breakdown, 
precise Tournament dates and other information are 
available at poolplayers.com or by contacting Local League 
Management or APA.  

touRnAME nt i nfo RMA tion A nD Rul Es • 76WORLD POOL CHAMPIONSHIPS
The Open Division 8-Ball and 9-Ball World Championships have 
specific eligibility and qualification rules, starting at the Local Level 
with the World Qualifiers. Areas that have an additional Tournament 
structure used to narrow the field for the World Qualifiers may use 
these same rules.
1. How To Become A Qualified Team
Teams qualify for their World Qualifier by ending the session as the 
High Points Finisher, winning a division title or by finishing Playoffs 
immediately behind a team that is already qualified. At least one 
team per division qualifies each session. If the division plays all three 
sessions in the League year, a minimum of three teams will qualify. The 
only way a team can qualify for the World Championships is through 
their performance in regular League play and the World Qualifier.
NOTE 1: APA allows Local Leagues to set different qualification 
requirements in order to accommodate different League sizes and 
structures. Be sure to check your Local Bylaws for any variances in the 
qualification structure and requirements.
NOTE 2: Qualification does not pass down in 4-team divisions.
2. Qualification Can Be Lost
Be familiar with all the rules in this section in order to avoid losing 
qualification. If you have any concerns regarding your team’s 
qualification, please contact your Local League Management.
3. Players Must Maintain Current Membership
If your membership is not current, you are not eligible to participate in 
the World Championships. If any of your teammates are not available 
at renewal time, consider renewing for them so they do not get 
dropped from the roster and become ineligible. Notify your Local 
League Management immediately if a player is accidentally dropped 
from the roster.
4. Qualified Teams Must Maintain Active Status
A team that qualified in the Summer Session must play during the 
following Fall and Spring Sessions in the League area in which they 
qualified. A team that qualified in the Fall Session must play during the 
subsequent Spring Session in the League area in which they qualified. 
Local Bylaws may impose additional requirements.

touRnAME nt i nfo RMA tion A nD Rul Es • 775. 50% Rule For Qualified Teams
Qualified teams that do not finish in the top half of their division in 
the session(s) after they qualify are subject to heavy scrutiny of their 
handicaps and/or potential loss of qualification at the discretion of 
their League Operator. Summer Session qualified teams must finish in 
the top half of their division in the subsequent Fall and Spring Sessions 
leading into the World Qualifier. Fall Session qualified teams must 
finish in the top half of their division in the subsequent Spring Session 
of the League year leading into the World Qualifier.
6. Spring Rosters Are World Qualifier Rosters
Your roster at the end of the Spring Session will be your team's roster 
for the World Qualifier. Players who were on the roster when the 
team qualified, but are not on the roster in the Spring Session leading 
into the World Qualifier, are not eligible because they are no longer 
considered part of the team. THERE ARE NO EXCEPTIONS TO  
THIS RULE.
A team with only four available or eligible players on their roster 
will have to play in the World Qualifier with those four players. All 
roster changes for qualified teams must be made prior to the teams 
submitting their week four scoresheets during the Spring Session. All 
qualified team rosters are frozen at the conclusion of week four. No 
one may be dropped or added. THERE ARE NO EXCEPTIONS TO 
THIS RULE.
7. The Skill Level You Must Play With
Each player will start the World Qualifier and World Championships at 
their Highest Skill Level. A player's Highest Skill Level is the highest of 
the following:
• The skill level that the player and team believe represents the 
player’s best playing ability.
• The player’s current APA assigned skill level.
• The player’s session-ending skill level in the session in which the 
team qualified for the World Qualifier.
• The player’s highest session-ending skill level in any session 
following the session in which the team qualified.
• The player’s highest skill level in any APA League area in which the 
player currently plays.

touRnAME nt i nfo RMA tion A nD Rul Es • 78• The player’s skill level at the end of the World Qualifier in the 
corresponding League year.
• The skill level they played at during any prior National Singles 
Championships, National Team Championships, Poolplayer 
Championships or World Pool Championships.
Minimum Championship Skill Levels:  During Championship Level 
Events as well as at the 8-Ball Classic & 9-Ball Shootout Regional 
Tournaments, ladies may participate at their assigned skill level, even 
if that assigned skill level is lower than a SL3. All other players must 
participate at a skill level 3 or higher. To be eligible to participate at a 
skill level lower than a SL3, the player’s State/Province issued picture 
ID, Military ID or passport photo ID must identify her as female.  
8. Number Of Scores Handicaps Must Be Based On
In order to participate in the World Championships, a player must 
have established their handicap before the end of the Spring 
Session leading into the World Qualifier, in the format in which they 
are advancing. An established handicap is one that is based on a 
minimum of 10 lifetime match scores. Matches played during regular 
session play, Playoffs and Tri-Annuals count toward the minimum 
requirement. Match scores obtained through participation in other 
events, prior to having an established handicap, do not count towards 
the minimum requirement.
9. Adding A New Player To A Qualified Team In The Spring 
Session
Any player being added to a qualified team in the Spring Session 
should have a skill level based on at least 20 scores. If the player has 
fewer than 20 scores, that player must be approved by the League 
Operator prior to being added to the roster. The player’s skill level will 
be subject to heavy scrutiny.
10. Number Of Times You Must Have Played With Your Team
Each player must have played at least four times with the team during 
the regular Spring Session (prior to Playoffs) leading into the World 
Qualifier. Players who played less than four matches will be ineligible. 
Local Bylaws may impose additional eligibility requirements.
11. Skill Levels Updated
A player's skill level may be adjusted during any stage of the World 
Championships, as a result of The Equalizer®, a Tournament Director 
or the APA Handicap Review Committee.  

touRnAME nt i nfo RMA tion A nD Rul Es • 7912. Teams Must Retain Four Original Members
In order for a team to maintain its qualification, the team's World 
Championship roster must include four original members. Original 
members are those who were on a team when it gained qualification 
to a World Qualifier.
• A team that qualifies in the Summer Session must retain four 
original members in the subsequent Fall and Spring Sessions. 
Should a Summer qualified team re-qualify in the Fall, all of the 
individuals on its Fall Session roster will be considered original 
members thereafter.
• A team that qualifies in the Fall Session must retain four original 
members in the subsequent Spring Session.
• Any player on the Spring Session roster, who was on the team when 
it first qualified, is considered original.
• An original player who does not meet the minimum matches 
played requirement prior to Playoffs will be ineligible, but will still 
be considered original.
13. Team Skill Level Limit
The 23-Rule will be enforced at all levels of the World Championships.
14. Time-Outs
Time-outs are limited to one per player, per rack, regardless of skill 
level. Remember: 
• If any member of the team suggests a time-out to the shooter, the 
time-out will be charged.
• If the player requests a time-out, the coach may refuse it. Ineligible 
players cannot coach or participate in any group consensus.
15. Common Players At The World Level Of The Championships
A common player is defined as a player on more than one team. 
A team may have up to two players that are common with another 
team in the same format at the World Championships. A player 
may be common on up to two teams in each format at the World 
Championships. This means a player may qualify on up to two 8-Ball 
teams and two 9-Ball teams. A player who qualifies on more than two 
teams in any format must choose which teams they will stay on, prior to 
entering the World Championships.

touRnAME nt i nfo RMA tion A nD Rul Es • 80NOTE 1:  Players who are advancing to the World Championships on 
multiple teams should contact their League Operator for additional 
information about the common player guidelines.
NOTE 2:  Matches will not be held up for players who are participating 
on multiple teams.
16. Identification Requirements
All players must present photo identification in the form of a current 
state-issued ID from their State or Province of residence, a Military ID, 
or a passport at all Championship Tournaments. Players who do not 
have a valid photo ID must obtain one prior to participating in  
the event.
NOTE:  A player who cannot provide the required form of photo ID will 
not be allowed to play without approval from the Tournament Director.
17. Travel Assistance Policy
The Local League awards Travel Assistance to the team(s) advancing 
from the World Qualifier to the World Pool Championships. The Travel 
Assistance paid by the Local League is not prize money and should not 
be considered prize money.
Travel Assistance is awarded to offset some of the expenses incurred 
by the team in traveling to, and participating in, the World Pool 
Championships. The Travel Assistance is to be split equitably among 
the team members traveling to the Tournament. Proof of travel 
arrangements may be required by Local League Management before 
Travel Assistance is distributed.
Teams qualified for the World Pool Championships that do not 
intend to travel to and participate in the Tournament are not eligible 
to receive Travel Assistance; in this situation, a runner-up team will 
become eligible to compete in the World Pool Championships and 
receive Travel Assistance. In addition, if one or more players on a 
qualified team choose not to attend the World Pool Championships, 
those team members may not be eligible to receive Travel Assistance 
and/or other awards.
18. APA Is The Highest Authority
In order to preserve the fairness and integrity of its Championships, 
APA reserves the right to disqualify any player(s) and/or team(s) if:

touRnAME nt i nfo RMA tion A nD Rul Es • 81a. The certification packet submitted by the player/team appears to 
have been altered or contains irregularities that might give a player 
or team an unfair advantage.
b. Any member of the team is participating at a skill level lower than 
their true playing ability.
c. Any fraudulent circumstances of any nature are found to exist.
d. A player or team’s sportsmanship or conduct is deemed by APA to 
discredit the Tournament, the League or the sport.
The determination of whether a player is participating at a skill level 
below their true ability is necessarily subjective. APA is the sole judge 
of a player’s ability and may make such a determination in its absolute 
judgment and discretion.
Disqualification will result in forfeiture of all titles, awards and prize 
money as well as a minimum two-year suspension from the League.
APA is the highest authority concerning all Tournament rulings. 
Its decisions are final.

touRnAME nt i nfo RMA tion A nD Rul Es • 82GLOSSARY
Ball-In-Hand:  (1) The advantage given to a player when their opponent 
scratches or otherwise fouls, wherein the player may place the cue ball 
anywhere on the table; (2) A defensive move to pass your turn at the table.
Bank (Shot): Driving an object ball to a rail in the course of a shot.
Break (Shot):  The first shot of a game.
Bridge: (1) Hand that holds and guides the cue shaft; (2) The type of hold; 
(3) A shaped plate mounted or placed near or at the tip of a cue stick.
Bye:  A placeholder in a schedule or Tournament for a missing team or 
participant.  When there are an odd number of teams in a division or 
participants in a Tournament, there will be a bye. A team scheduled to 
play a bye does not play and no fees are due.
Carom: The glancing of one ball off another.
Cue Ball: The white ball that a player strikes first when executing a shot.
Defensive Shots:  A shot where there is no intent on the part of the 
shooter to pocket a ball of their category (8-Ball), or pocket any ball after 
contacting the lowest numbered ball on the table (9-Ball).
Double-Hit: An illegal shot involving the tip of the cue stick coming into 
contact with the cue ball twice during the execution of a single shot. This 
foul may occur through double clutching the cue ball, or in situations 
where the cue ball is nearly frozen to the object ball or rail. In the latter 
case, the double-hit often occurs due to the difficulty in moving the stick 
away from the shot quickly enough to avoid the cue ball rebounding 
back into the stick. In general, the shooter can lessen the likelihood of 
committing this type of foul by hitting the cue ball into the object ball or 
rail at an angle, or by elevating the butt of the cue about 30 degrees. This 
does not guarantee that a foul will be avoided; however, it cuts down the 
length of the follow through, which is the principal cause of a double-hit.
Draw:  A method of stroking the cue ball that causes it to spin backwards 
after contact with an object ball.
English:  A method of stroking the cue ball that causes any type of spin.

gloss ARY • 83Established Skill Level: A handicap that is based on 10 match scores in  
a given format.
Follow: A method of stroking the cue ball that causes it to follow the 
object ball in the same direction.
Follow Through: The motion of the cue stick carrying through the area 
previously occupied by the cue ball.
Foot Rail:  (1) The short rail closest to the area where the balls are 
dispensed; (2) The short rail closest to where the balls are racked; (3) 
The rail opposite from the end used by the players to break (see Table 
Diagram).
Foot Spot:  A spot placed in the exact center of an imaginary line drawn 
across the pool table between the second diamonds from the foot rail 
(see Table Diagram).
Foul:  An illegal shot resulting in loss of turn at the table and ball-in-hand 
for the opponent.
Frozen Ball: A ball touching another ball or a rail. If it is touching another 
ball, it is frozen on that ball; if it is touching a rail, it is frozen on the rail.
Head Rail: The rail closest to the end used by the players to break (see 
Table Diagram).
Head String: The imaginary line drawn across the pool table between the 
second diamonds from the head rail (see Table Diagram).
Hill-Hill Match:  The point in match play where both players need only 
one more game to win.
Inning:  A completed cycle during which both players had one turn  
at the table.
Jaw of the Pocket: (1) The part of the cushion that is cut at an angle to 
form the opening from the bed of the table into the pocket; (2) Area of the 
playing surface between an end rail and a side rail (see Table Diagram).  
A ball is considered in the jaw of the pocket if any portion crosses the 
imaginary line as shown in the Table Diagram.
Jump Shot:  The striking of the cue ball with the cue tip, in a downward 
fashion, for the purpose of elevating or jumping the cue ball over an 
impeding object ball to achieve a legal hit.

gloss ARY • 84Kick Shot:  A shot that drives the cue ball to a rail before contacting the 
object ball.
Lag: Method used to determine who   breaks in the first game.
Massé (Shot):  A shot in which a player curves the cue ball around 
another ball in order to strike an intended ball. A massé is accomplished 
by raising the butt end of the cue and using either right or left english. 
The more the cue is raised, the more the cue ball will curve. Extreme 
massé shots, improperly executed, can cause damage to pool tables and 
billiard equipment.
Miscue:  A shot in which the cue’s tip does not hit the cue ball squarely 
and glances off without driving the cue ball on its desired course.
Object Ball:  Any ball besides the cue ball.
On the Hill:  Term used to indicate a player is one game away from 
winning their match.
Open Table: Term used to describe the status of an 8-Ball game, after the 
break shot, in which neither player has assumed a category of object balls. 
The player may shoot any ball, except the 8-ball, when the table is open 
without fouling assuming all other aspects of a legal shot occur.
Original Members:  A term that refers to those members who were on a 
team when it gained qualification to a World Qualifier.
Playing Surface: The bed of the table.
Push-Out:  A shot in 9-ball that requires announcing the intent to push-
out, and then shooting the cue ball to a new position. The shooter doesn’t 
need to satisfy the legal shot rule (driving a ball to a rail after a legal hit). 
Push-outs can only be used immediately after the break, by the breaker 
if they pocketed a ball on the break, or by the incoming player if no balls 
were pocketed on the break. Any ball pocketed on a push-out does not 
count and will be spotted. The shooter’s opponent then has the option to 
shoot from the new position or tell the shooter to take the shot. Normal 
game rules apply from that point on. Push-outs are allowed in the Masters 
format and at the U.S. Amateur Championship; however, push-outs are 
not allowed in any handicapped competition as they give the more highly 
skilled player too great of an advantage.

gloss ARY • 85Push Shot: A shot in which the cue ball is frozen to the object ball, and  
the shooter keeps the tip of the cue on the cue ball while pushing 
through the shot. Push shots are not fouls, but players who repeatedly 
guide the cue ball with force through object balls that are frozen to the 
cue ball, using a level cue and long follow through, may be subject to a 
sportsmanship penalty. In general, you can lessen the chance of being 
accused of shooting a push shot by hitting the cue ball into the object ball 
at an angle, or by elevating the butt of your cue about 30 degrees.
Regular Shooting Cue: Any standard pool cue designed to shoot the 
majority of shots in a game of pool. These cues may be used to perform 
jump shots, massé shots, and break shots in all APA League play.
Safety: A defensive action taken when a player has no makeable or 
high percentage shot or chooses to leave their opponent in a difficult 
situation. It is a legal shot and part of the game of pool. A safety must still 
conform to the rules requiring the shooter to contact the correct ball first 
and striking a rail afterwards. If the correct ball is accidentally pocketed 
while playing a safety, the shooter must continue to shoot. Players with 
integrity call their safeties.  Safeties must be marked as Defensive Shots 
on the scoresheet.  
Sandbagging:  The unethical practice of deliberately playing below your 
ability in order to manipulate your handicap.
Scratch:  (1) The pocketing of the cue ball; (2) Driving the cue ball off the 
playing surface and onto the floor.
Session:  Refers to a season in which League play takes place. There are 
three sessions in each League Year: Summer, Fall and Spring.
Soft Break: Sometimes referred to as a safe break. A break shot that is 
executed at a level significantly less than the breaker's full strength. Also 
known as "breaking safe," breaking soft is not allowed in APA matches.
Specialty Cues:  Cues specially designed to perform specific shots. These 
include, but are not limited to, jump cues, break cues, jump-break cues 
(combinations of jump cues and break cues) and “shorties”.
Two-Way Shot: An attempt to pocket a ball and leave one’s opponent 
with a difficult shot if the attempt fails.

tAblE Di AgRAM • 86
foot  EnD
HEAD E nDSIDE OR LONG RAILSIDE OR LONG RAILSHORT OR END RAIL
foot  sPot
HEAD st Ring
JAW OF THE
POCKET

tAblE Di AgRAM • 87INDEX
8-Ball Classic, 1, 72-73, 78
8-On-The-Break, 63, 67
9-Ball Shootout, 1, 72-73, 78
9-On-The-Snap, 45, 65-67
Adding Players, 23, 61, 78
Age Requirements, 20, 41, 73-74
APA Championships, 1, 19, 23, 33-35,   
72-80
 Also See Championship Tournaments
Appeals, 33, 41
Ball-In-Hand, 19, 29, 31, 49, 53-55
 Also See Fouls
 Definition, 82
 Placement Of Cue Ball, 29, 46-47, 53
 Immediately After Break, 46-47, 53
 During A Time-Out, 29
Bank
 Definition, 82
Board Of Governors, 15-16, 19, 32, 40, 41
Break Cues, 38, 85
Breaking, 44-45
 After The Break, 46-47
 Open Table, 47
  Definition, 84
 Legal/Illegal, 45-46
 Scratch On The Break, 46-47
 Soft Break, 46
  Definition, 85
Byes, 24-25, 68
 Definition, 82
 Not Counted As Matches Played, 24,  
 38
Carom
 Definition, 82
Championship Tournaments
 Also See Playoffs
 Assignment Of Skill Levels, 23, 32,   
77-78, 81 
 Certification Packet, 81 
 Eligibility, 72-75
  Local Qualifier Boards, 72-73
 Loss Of Eligibility, 70, 76 
 Poolplayer Championships, 1, 72-73
 World Pool Championships, 1, 33, 35,  
 74-81
  Local Level, 35, 76
  Common Players, 79-80
  Spring Roster, 77 
 Qualified Teams/Players, 23, 34, 76-79 
Championship Lowest Attainable (CLA), 
33
Coaching, 28-30, 54, 61, 71, 79
 Also See Time-Outs
 Coaches Allowed Per Game, 29-30, 79
 Fouls, 54
 Guidelines, 28-30
 Placement Of Cue Ball, 29
Combination Shots, 43, 47-48Conduct, 68-71, 81
Cue Ball
 Definition, 82
Dead Balls, 47-48, 51, 64-65
Defensive Shots, 31-32, 51, 63-64, 66
 Also See Safety
 Also See Sandbagging
 And Scorekeeping, 31-32, 51, 63-64, 
66
 Definition, 82
 Ethical Vs Unethical, 31
Disputes, 40-41
Disqualification, 23, 81
Division, 14, 23
Division Representatives, 14-15
Draw
 Definition, 82
Dropping Players, 23, 61, 71, 76-77
Eligibility, 18, 29, 36, 41, 73-80
 Championship Tournaments, 32,   
73-80
 Membership Benefits, 17, 29, 41-42, 70
 Playoffs, 32, 36-37
English
 Definition, 82
Equipment, 38-39
Etiquette, 6-7
 Also See Sportsmanship
Fees, 16-17, 21-22, 25, 27, 36
 Membership, 16-17, 21-22
  Transferability, 18
 Playoff, 36
 Renewals, 16-17, 21-22
 Section On Scoresheet, 61
 Tournament, 72
 Weekly Fees, 17, 25
Follow
 Definition, 83
Follow Through
 Definition, 83
Foot Rail, 44
 Definition, 83
Forfeits, 25-27, 33-34
 Deliberate Forfeits, 26
 Not Counted As Matches Played, 25, 
37
 Scoring, 26-27
Formats, 12-13, 18, 26-30, 33-34, 37, 
43-45
 Gender-Specific Participation, 12-13
Fouls, 19, 28, 43-50, 52-55
 Coaching, 28-29
 Cue Ball Fouls, 52-54
  Definition, 83
 Double-Hit, 54
  Definition, 82
 Good Hit/Bad Hit, 50, 52
 Loss Of Game, 55  

inDEx • 88On The Break, 45-47, 53
 Scratch, 46-47, 49, 53, 55
  Definition, 85
 Table Scratch, 55
Frozen Ball, 51-54
 Definition, 83
Gambling, 20
Game Rules, 43
Games You Must Win In 8-Ball, 58-59
Handicap Advisory Committee, 16
Handicap Manipulation, 16, 31-32, 57
 Also See Sandbagging
Handicap System, 32-33, 57-59
Head Rail, 86
 Definition, 83
Head String, 45-46, 53, 84
 Definition, 83
Hill-Hill Match
 Definition, 83
Host Location, 6-7, 13-15, 19, 39, 42
House Rules, 14
How To Win, 55-56
Identification, 20-21, 80
Innings, 62-66
 Definition, 83
Jaw Of Pocket, 44, 86
 Definition, 83
Jump Cues, 39, 85
Jump Shot, 14, 39, 54, 85
 Definition, 83
 Illegal/Scoop, 54
Kick Shot
 Definition, 84
Lag/Lagging, 44
 Definition, 84
League Operator, 12
League Structure, 12-19
 League Management, 12, 16
Local Bylaws, 19
Lowest Attainable Skill Level, 33
Marking The Pocket, 55
Marking The Table, 51
Massé Shot, 14, 39
 Definition, 84
Miscue
 Definition, 84
Object Ball
 Definition, 84
On The Hill
 Definition, 84
Open Table, 46-47
 Definition, 84 
Originality, 79
 Definition, 84
Playing Surface, 29, 48-49, 53
 Definition, 84
Playoffs, 35-37
Points You Must Win In 9-Ball, 59
Probation, 15, 70-71
Protests, 40-41
Push-Out, 47
 Definition, 84Push Shot
 Definition, 85
Qualified Teams/Players
 See Championship Tournaments
Qualifier Board/Local Qualifier Board
 See Championship Tournaments
Racking, 44, 51
Regular Shooting Cue, 39
 Definition, 85
Safety, 31
 Also See Defensive Shots
 Definition, 85
Sandbagging, 32
 Also See Handicap Manipulation
 Definition, 85
Scoring, 18, 26, 27-28, 31, 35, 58-67
 Byes, 24-25
 Forfeits, 25-27
 Incomplete Playoff Match, 35
 Marking Inaccurate Information, 32
 Playoffs, 26-27, 35
 Reporting, 30 
 Scorekeeping 8-Ball, 62-64
 Scorekeeping 9-Ball, 64-66
 Scorekeeping Masters, 67
Senior Skill Level Player, 25, 34-35
 Limited Senior Skill Level Rule, 34
Session, 18
 Definition, 85
Skill Levels, 13, 16, 21-24, 26, 29-30, 
32-35, 37, 57-59, 77-78, 81 
 Assignment Of, 21-22, 32-33, 77-78
 Established, 18, 22-23, 32, 58, 73,   
75, 78
 Definition, 81
 Manipulation Of, 32
  Also See Handicap Manipulation
 Must Win Charts, 58-59
 New Players, 21-22
 Reporting, 32
 Time-Outs, 29
Splitting Matches, 27
Sportsmanship, 6, 68
 Also See Conduct
 Sportsmanship Penalties/Violations, 5, 
8, 15, 43, 46, 50-51, 85
Spotting Balls, 49-84
Stalemated Games, 51
Suspension, 15, 30, 41, 70, 81 
Team Captains, 13
Team Skill Level Limit, 24-25, 33-35,   
37, 79
 Team Skill Level Limit Rule, 33-35
Ties, 37
 Tie-Breaking Procedure, 36-37 
Time Guidelines, 8
Time-Outs, 28-29, 79
 Also See Coaching
Trophies And Awards, 18-19
Two-Way Shot, 31
 Definition, 85 
Wild Card Teams, 35-36

inDEx • 89
5% DISCOUNT
USE CODE: APARULES 
*Some restrictions may apply.1.866.THE DAWGWWW.POOLDAWG.COMWWW.POOLDAWG.COM
OFFICIAL ONLINE  
RETAIL STORE  
OF THE APAYOUR  
TEAM  YOUR  
TEAM   
FOR ALL OF  
YOUR POOL  
EQUIPMENT NEEDS!
ORDER YOUR
FREE 
CATALOG TODAY!  APA OFFICIAL 
SPONSORS
Official Cues and Cases  
of the APAOfficial Ball of the APA
and the APA Championships
Official Online Billiards Retailer of APA
Official Sponsor of the APA Championships
Official Pool Table of the APA 
and the APA Championships
Team  Manual Cover 2023.indd   2Team  Manual Cover 2023.indd   2 2/16/23   10:42 AM2/16/23   10:42 AM

inDEx • 90
Revised 1/23
Team  Manual Cover 2023.indd   1Team  Manual Cover 2023.indd   1 2/16/23   10:42 AM2/16/23   10:42 AM